Introduction
Knowing a second language next to one’s mother tongue, often English as a lingua franca for those who do not already speak it as native
speakers, has become a common requirement of modern life. While
learning a second language (L2) often starts out in school or language
courses, it is a lifelong process. Our knowledge of words, the most basic
meaningful building blocks of language, increases until late adulthood
in the first language (L1; Christian & Paterson, 1936; Keuleers et al.,
2015) and most likely (though not yet documented in a normative way)
also in the second language, if used regularly (Miralpeix, 2020). A large
part of this vocabulary growth is typically a result of incidental learning,
i.e., learning spontaneously without the explicit instruction to learn, like
picking up words in conversations or during reading. Despite a large
body of research into L2 word acquisition (e.g., de Vos et al., 2018;
Schmitt & Schmitt, 2020; Webb et al., 2020), the neural mechanisms of
incidentally ‘picking up’ a new L2 word (or failing to do so) have hardly
been investigated, particularly in an approximately realistic setting.
The present study sets out to pinpoint the decisive moment of
hearing a previously unknown L2 word in a realistic setting, to identify
its electrophysiological correlates in the brain, and to determine in how
far these correlates are indicative of learning success. The realistic
setting we use is a (partly scripted) dialogue game; our previous studies

have confirmed that this paradigm, which revolves around price comparisons, is highly successful in concealing the learning aim of the study,
thus giving rise to ‘incidental’ (as opposed to intentional) learning (de
Vos, Schriefers, & Lemhöfer, 2019; de Vos, Schriefers, ten Bosch, &
Lemhöfer, 2019). We focus on three correlates: First, event-related potential (ERP) effects of encountering a previously unknown L2 word for
a familiar object; second, ERP correlates of this encounter depending on
whether the word will subsequently be learned or not; and third, correlates of a second encounter with such a novel L2 word that has just
been learned or not (yet) learned, each in comparison to L2 words
known already before participating in the experiment.
We hope that the results of the current study will inform us about in
how far the neural processes during the incidental encounter and
possible subsequent learning of a novel L2 word resemble those processes that we know from, on the one hand, linguistic (non)word processing, and on the other hand, intentional or incidental memory
encoding processes. So far, research on second language acquisition
(SLA) has typically been conducted within applied linguistics and in
complete separation of (neuro-) cognitive memory research; therefore,
we know very little about in how far general principles of memory
processing apply to the learning of novel (L2) words (but see, e.g., Chen
& Chen, 2023; Havas et al., 2018; Lindsay & Gaskell, 2010, for exceptions). If word learning is governed by largely the same neural processes

* Corresponding author at: Thomas van Aquinostraat 4, 6525 GD Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
E-mail address: kristin.lemhofer@donders.ru.nl (K. Lemhöfer).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2024.104585
Received 6 March 2024; Received in revised form 3 October 2024; Accepted 8 November 2024
Available online 14 November 2024
0749-596X/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

as learning in general, ERP signatures should also resemble each other.
A further issue is whether spontaneous, thus incidental learning
follows the same ‘memory route’ as explicit or intentional learning does.
While most memory studies use explicit learning paradigms, involving a
strategy- and attention-governed process that resembles, for instance,
classroom learning, incidental learning is supposed to be the product of
spontaneously and effortlessly ‘picking up’ new information in a similar
way as children acquire language (Hulstijn, 2003). It has also been
shown that under incidental learning conditions, words can be acquired
by memory-impaired patients with damage to the central neural hub for
long-term declarative memory, the hippocampus (so-called ‘fast mapping’; Sharon et al., 2011; Swingley, 2010). It seems thus plausible that
incidental vs. explicit learning routines involve different neurophysiological processes. Therefore, we will use an incidental learning paradigm
and compare it, where possible, with established findings from explicit
learning paradigms.
For each of the three ERP correlates we are going to study, we will
briefly review what we might expect to find, based on memory and
psycholinguistic studies.

decision task, is a common finding (e.g., Barber et al., 2013; BermúdezMargaretto et al., 2015; Holcomb et al., 2002; Leinonen et al., 2009;
Supp et al., 2004; Ziegler et al., 1997); however, these experiments do
not typically have a learning component. In a word learning study using
a semantic classification task during EEG measurement, Bakker et al.
(2015) also found larger N400 components for novel vs. existing words,
but the effect carried on into the LPC window (500–700 ms), i.e. there
was a smaller (positive) LPC for novel words.
Looking at the literature of so-called recognition memory, where
items are first studied and then presented among new items (‘lures’) for
recognition, the comparison of the encounters with new vs. old (i.e.
previously studied) items during the recognition test may be regarded as
similar as the comparison between perceiving a novel (‘new’) vs. an
existing word (‘old’). In this literature, it is commonly observed that
(correctly classified) new items give rise to more negative ERPs than old
items, both (left) parietally from about 500 to 800 ms after stimulus
onset, i.e., in the LPC window, and frontally between approximately 300
and 500 ms (sometimes called “FN400 old/new effect”), the classical
N400 window (though the N400 is typically distributed across the whole
scalp). The parietal effect between 500 and 800 ms and the FN400 have
been attributed to qualitatively different recognition processes based on
‘recollection’ and ‘familiarity’, respectively (e.g., Curran & Cleary,
2003; Duarte et al., 2004; Rugg & Curran, 2007; Rugg et al., 1998).
Possibly, the lingering “N400” effects for new vs. existing words
observed by Bakker et al. (2015) and Bermúdez-Margaretto et al. (2015)
were in fact neural correlates of recollection as already described in the
memory literature. Regarding a possible difference between incidental
and intentional (explicit) encoding, old/new effects have typically been
observed to be highly similar across these modes of encoding, at least for
subsequently successfully recognized ‘old’ trials (e.g., Boehm & Sommer, 2005; Haese & Czernochowski, 2015; van Hooff, 2005).
Returning to our study, it is not quite clear what to expect in terms of
ERPs when L2 learners encounter a previously unknown (as opposed to a
known) L2 word incidentally. Psycholinguistic research would most
likely point to an N400 effect caused by the ‘pseudoword’ status of these
novel words, while memory research, based on findings for ‘new’ items
in the recognition paradigm, would suggest one or multiple negativities
that may be more stretched out across time and the scalp.

Neurophysiological correlates of encountering a novel (L2) word
We know of three ERP studies that examined the moment of
encountering a new, as compared to an already known, word. All these
studies replaced existing words in sequences of written sentences with
the pseudowords; for instance, the pseudoword meeve replaced the word
cloud (Batterink & Neville, 2011). The sentences were either constraining with respect to meaning, such that the meaning of the ‘novel
word’ could be inferred from the context (M+ condition); or this was not
the case, either because sentence context was not constraining, or
because the meanings were inconsistent across several sentences containing the same ‘novel word’ (M- condition). Sentences in which the
real words were preserved served as baseline (R condition). Remarkably,
though, following the psycholinguistic rather than the memory research
tradition, two of these studies looked only at the N400 (typically
measured between 300 and 500 ms post-word onset), the ERP component commonly attributed to semantic integration, ignoring possible
later memory-related effects like the late positive component (LPC,
starting from about 500 ms after word onset).
In the first of these studies in L1 Spanish, Mestres-Missé et al. (2007)
reported ‘a posterior N400′ during reading of a real word as compared to
a pseudoword (both M+ and M-), which however became indistinguishable for M + pseudowords vs. real words by the third sentence that
contained a given target. As mentioned above, other time windows were
not analyzed. In contrast to these findings, Chen et al. (2017), in L2
English, observed a more canonical N400 over the whole scalp when
pseudowords were first encountered as compared to real words. In the
only study that also considered later LPC-effects, Batterink and Neville
(2011), presenting L1 English speakers with a total of ten English sentences per target (pseudo)word, also observed an N400 for pseudowords
as compared to real words at first presentation; this difference diminished with subsequent presentations. The LPC effects seem somewhat
blurred by the many presentations, but there was a greater LPC for M+
than for M- pseudowords that increased with more repetitions. Interestingly, the study also split conditions into pseudowords that were
subsequently learned vs. not learned, a set of results we will return to
later on (for comparison 2).
These three studies, although not very consistently, seem to indicate
larger N400s when ‘novel words’ as compared to existing words were
presented, and no (or not analyzed) later effects. However, in an
experimental situation where the replacement of real words with
pseudowords must have been fairly transparent to the participants, it is
questionable in how far ‘learning’ these pseudowords resembles incidental, real-life learning of existing, but previously unknown words.
In the psycholinguistic word recognition literature, a larger N400 to
pseudowords as compared to real words in, for instance, a lexical

Neurophysiological correlates of subsequent learning success
Our second focus is on whether ERP signatures during encountering
a previously unknown L2 word are predictive of later learning success.
Sanquist et al. (1980) were the first to observe that ERPs collected
during encoding of to-be-remembered stimuli differ depending on
whether they are later successfully remembered or not, so-called subsequent memory effects (SME’s). Since then, many studies have
corroborated and extended this observation (e.g., Friedman & Johnson,
2000; Mecklinger & Kamp, 2023; Paller & Wagner, 2002). The most
frequent finding seems to be that of a positivity for later remembered vs.
not remembered items starting about 500 ms post stimulus onset during
encoding, i.e., in the LPC window (e.g.,Paller et al., 1988; Sanquist et al.,
1980; Van Petten & Senkfor, 1996), but effects of earlier latency and
different polarity have also been reported (Mecklinger & Kamp, 2023).
Regarding the difference between intentional and incidental encoding, Cycowicz and Friedman (1999) observed SME’s only for intentionally, not for incidentally encoded sounds; however, other studies (e.
g., Otten & Rugg, 2001; Paller et al., 1987) did observe robust SME’s in
different incidental encoding tasks.
Accordingly, in the word ‘learning’ study during reading by Batterink and Neville (2011) described above, collapsing across all ten presentations of a target pseudoword, ERPs during reading those
pseudowords that were later correctly recalled (i.e., by coming up with
the corresponding real word) were more positive in the 500–900 ms LPC
window than the pseudowords not correctly recalled. The effect was
present over the whole scalp, but largest at posterior sites. In an
2

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

involves a dialogue between a real person (the experimenter) and the
participant, this was replaced by a ‘dialogue’ with pre-recorded phrases
in the present study, due to the need for maximal standardization of the
auditory signal in an EEG context.
After listening to a price comparison by the (real or simulated)
partner, the participant has to press a button indicating whether they
agree with the other’s statement. Critically, some of the objects are
typically unknown in English in our population of L2 speakers (e.g.,
whisk, float, or bib), which will be confirmed for each individual
participant by the pretest. All these words occur first in an utterance by
the partner, i.e., the pre-recordings, in this case. Hearing these words
said by the ‘other person’ gives the participant the chance to learn the
word and be able to use it in a later trial involving the same object. The
method has been proven successful both in learning rates and in concealing the learning aim of the study (de Vos, Schriefers, ten Bosch,
et al., 2019; for a variant of the paradigm, see de Vos, Schriefers, &
Lemhöfer, 2019). We will slightly adapt and use the method in an EEG
setting to study the three questions framed above.

(explicit) word learning study in which L1 Chinese speakers learned
Russian words through repeated exposure to translation pairs, Zhang
et al. (2023) also showed that LPC amplitudes correlated with learning
success.
To our knowledge, no previous study has investigated subsequent
memory effects during ‘truly’ incidental L2 word learning. If this kind of
learning proceeds using the same mechanisms as those at work during
the highly artificial memory paradigms, we would expect a larger LPC
for subsequently learned vs. not learned novel words. However, given
that encoding conditions in our paradigm are incidental, effects may
also be absent, as an earlier study for auditory learning has failed to find
incidental encoding SME’s (Cycowicz & Friedman, 1999).
ERP correlates of word processing after learning
Finally, we will look at the ERP signature of novel L2 English words
that have been learned, or that have not been learned just one experimental block ago, each in comparison to existing words that were known
before. We expect that ERPs for those novel words that have just been
learned will resemble those for previously known words more than is the
case for novel words that have not yet been learned.
We do not know of any studies that looked at ERP effects to novel
words (or other items) that had just been ‘trained’ before, depending on
the learning outcome of this training (learned vs. not learned words).
However, various studies showed that ERPs for trained or learned novel
(L1 or L2) words gradually get to resemble those for previously known
words (Bakker et al., 2015; Shtyrov et al., 2010; Soskey et al., 2016).
Frishkoff et al. (2010) compared two training methods, only one of
which involved a high-constrain context that could actually lead to
learning, and found that only novel words trained in this condition, but
not those trained in a low-constraint, ‘meaningless’ training condition,
became word-like in terms of their ERP signature two days later. Bermúdez-Margaretto et al. (2015) showed that ERPs for words and pseudowords that initially differed in terms of an N400 extending into the
LPC window for pseudowords largely disappeared after six blocks of
presentation. This convergence of ERP signals for (repeated) pseudowords and words occurred especially in the LPC window and for centralparietal electrodes. Similarly, Mestres-Missé et al. (2007) showed that
ERPs on pseudowords repeatedly put in a meaningful contrast (M+)
became indistinguishable from those for real words by the third presentation in terms of an N400 (300–500 ms), the only time window
analyzed, while M- pseudowords not embedded in a meaningful context
remained more positive than M + and real word conditions.
In contrast, the similar study by Batterink and Neville (2011) does
not report of ERP signatures of pseudowords (M+ or M-) approaching
those of real words with more (up to 10) repetitions.
Thus, despite the lack of studies that employed a similar comparison,
we expect that novel English words that have just been learned one
block earlier will show more word-like ERP signatures than those that
have not yet been learned, despite the same degree of exposure (once
before).

Methods
All experimental procedures were performed in compliance with the
law and institutional guidelines and were approved by the Ethics
Committee of the Faculty of Social Sciences at Radboud University,
ECSW2014/0109/245. All participants gave informed consent before
participation.
Participants
Initially, 64 speakers with Dutch as only mother tongue and proficient in L2 English, mostly students at Radboud University (the
Netherlands), were recruited without referring to English as the language of the experiment. This was done by offering the study to only
those participants from the university’s participant recruitment system
SONA who were registered to have Dutch as native and English as a
second language (which is the case for basically all Dutch students). We
tested as many participants as we could afford given our time and money
resources. All the participants were right-handed, had corrected-tonormal or normal vision and no hearing impairment.
Five participants who either knew too many novel (target) words (12
or more, = 30 %), or too few of the presumably known control and filler
words (less than 84, = 70 %) in the pretest were sent home after the
pretest, since they would have to learn considerably fewer, or more
words (including control / filler words that we assumed to be known)
than other participants, and because there was a large risk of some cell
sizes being too small for reliable EEG comparisons.
For the final analyses, remaining participants with too small cell sizes
in any of the relevant conditions (known words, novel words, novel
words learned and not learned in the first block) had to be excluded. This
means in particular that participants who learned too few or too many
words, or who had too many EEG artefacts, could not be included. We
excluded participants with less than seven trials in any of the cells of the
comparisons we would make. This was the case for 34 participants, so
that the remaining sample consisted of 25 participants for the first block
(17 females, age 19–34, mean age = 23.4). For the last two analyses in
the second block, distinguishing novel words that had vs. had not been
learned in the prior first block, we had to exclude three additional
participants due to the small number of usable trials, leaving us with 22
participants for this comparison.
Participants also completed a language background questionnaire
and the short English vocabulary test LexTALE (Lemhöfer & Broersma,
2012). The results of these measurements for the 25 remaining participants are summarized in Table 1.

The price comparisons dialogue paradigm
We developed a method to study incidental L2 word learning in
which participants are invited to take part in a study that revolves about
the subjective value of objects and their comparison, in order to conceal
the word learning aspect of the study (de Vos, Schriefers, ten Bosch,
et al., 2019). When participants came to the lab, it was revealed to them
that the study would be in their second language, in this case English,
with the pretended reason that students of all nationalities were invited
to the study (which was not true; the participant recruitment system
offered the study only to native speakers of Dutch). In the paradigm,
after a pretest that also is about subjective prices, the participant and a
partner take turns in comparing objects in price (“a rose is cheaper than
a book”). While the original method, as described in de Vos et al. (2019),
3

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

pretest, 2) the main learning part with EEG measurements, 3) the
administration of the LexTALE vocabulary test and of the language
background questionnaire (see Table 1), and 4) a posttest.

Table 1
Characteristics of participants (N = 25) concerning their language background.
Age
Age of first English acquisition
LexTALE score (%)
Self-ratings (1–7)
Frequency of using English in daily life
Proficiency of reading English
Proficiency of writing English
Proficiency of speaking English
Proficiency of listening to English
Number of other foreign languages spoken

Mean (SD)

Range (Min-Max)

23.4 (3.2)
10.7 (2.0)
76.6 (7.7)

19–34
7–15
63–93

​

​

5.0 (1.0)
5.4 (0.8)
4.6 (0.9)
4.6 (1.0)
5.6 (0.9)
0.5 (0.8)

Pretest
In order to assess for each individual participant which target items
were already known to them, or which control and filler items were not
known, a pretest was conducted. All 160 pictures that were to appear in
the word learning (EEG) experiment were printed on cards and sorted in
a fixed, pseudorandomized order in which there were no more than
three (presumably unknown) target words in a row. The participant was
asked to estimate a price for each object and to utter this estimate in a
complete sentence because the experimenter, seated behind a computer
screen, could not see which object they were referring to, e.g. “An apple
costs 50 cent.” They were told that if they did not know the name of the
object in English, they should describe it, like (for a whisk) “the thing to
whip cream with costs 5 Euros”.
The experimenter pretended to note down these prices, however
what they actually noted was whether the object name was known or
unknown to the participant. As ‘known’, we counted correct productions
as well as slightly wrong variations for which a correct ‘core’ was clearly
present (e.g., floater instead of float), or words with inaccurate pronunciation. Incorrect or missing responses such as descriptions (the thing
to whip cream with), placeholders (the thing), or the Dutch word (de garde)
were regarded as ‘unknown’.
Based on this pretest, we included only those trials in the final analyses in which a) the target word was unknown to the respective
participant, b) the control word that had been paired with it in the
respective trial was known, and c) the target word’s matched control
word (appearing in a different trial) was also known. After the pretest,
the EEG cap was fitted and all preparations were conducted for the
subsequent EEG measurements.

2–6
3–7
3–6
2–6
4–7
0–3

Materials
For stimulus selection, we conducted a pilot study with 45 Dutch
speakers of the same population who would not participate in the final
study. In that pilot study, 280 pictures of buyable and depictable objects
were shown and participants were asked to name them in English and in
Dutch (the latter to make sure they identified the object correctly). The
pictures were photos of the respective item, with sufficient resolution
and if possible on a white background, taken from the internet and
standardized to a uniform size. From this item pool, we selected 40
English words, all non-cognates with Dutch, as to-be-learned target
words. The pictures for these words were well recognized, as reflected
by Dutch naming responses, but their name in English was known by less
than 20 % of the pilot study participants. Examples are buckle, mortar or
bib. Furthermore, 120 English words, many of them cognates with
Dutch, that were known by 80 % of participants or more were selected as
fillers (80) or matched control words (40).
The 40 control words were matched to the target words item-wise in
terms of length in syllables and, if possible, onset phoneme (examples:
bottle, mirror, bed for the above named targets buckle, mortar, bib). Word
length was between one and three syllables (mean = 1.7, SD = 0.6 for
both targets and controls). None of the target or control words were
plurals or compound words, given that learning a new combination of
already known constituent words presumably represents a different
process than learning entirely new words.
80 fillers, also known by at least 80 % of the pilot study participants,
were used to fill up the trial scheme (see Word Learning Part below).
They had comparable characteristics to the target and control words
(mean length 1.7 syllables, SD = 0.8), but some were compound words
(e.g. microwave, gameboy). The complete list of items can be found in
Appendix A.
For the audio recordings of the price comparisons presented in the
listening trials of the dialogue game, the objects were internally ordered
in a roughly plausible manner according to price, and the sentences
containing the pairwise price comparisons were made according to that
order. That is, a fridge would have been regarded as more expensive than
a flower, but maybe as cheaper than a table. This way, we hoped to elicit
occasional disagreements in the acceptability judgments following the
listening trials. The sentences were recorded as they were read out by a
young female native speaker of standard southern British English. In
each of the sentence recordings containing a target or matched control
word, the time was measured from the start of the recording to the onset
of the respective word using Praat (Version 6.0.23; https://www.praat.
org/). These onset values were later imported into the EEG signal file to
signal the onset of the relevant auditory input.

Word learning part with EEG
The main word learning part took the form of a dialogue game with a
pre-recorded ‘partner’ that revolved around price comparisons. The use
of pre-recordings was necessary to standardize the auditory input for
each participant, as well as to facilitate that the EEG signal could be
linked to the exact onset of critical words in the heard utterances. Participants were instructed that, in every other trial (‘speaking trial’), they
were to make price comparisons between two objects for which they had
previously given price estimates (i.e., in the pretest); their price comparisons should be in agreement with those previously given estimates.
In the intervening trials (‘listening trials’), they would hear the price
comparisons of their ‘partner’ and should indicate whether they agreed
with them. Listening trials were the ones from which we would analyze
the EEG, looking at neural correlates of word learning. Speaking trials
were used to identify whether words had been learned from the prior
auditory exposure to the novel words or not. Participants were
instructed not to blink and to only look at the fixation cross while they
were listening to the audio recording.
During each trial, the participants first saw two pictures side by side
on the screen, on a white background. After two seconds, the pictures
disappeared and a fixation cross was shown in the middle of the screen,
to avoid eye movements to the two objects during the critical EEG
measurement. In listening trials, the audio recording of a sentence
referring to the two pictures was played simultaneously with the fixation
cross. Afterwards, the participants were asked to press one of two buttons on the buttonbox (left for “No” or right for “Yes”) to indicate if they
agreed with the statement made in the audio recording. The button press
triggered the appearance of two new pictures on the screen, which
would be a speaking trial. Participants were instructed to start their own
price comparisons with the picture on the left and to choose the adjective (cheaper / more expensive than) accordingly. Their answer was

Procedure
When participants entered the lab, they were told they were to take
part in a study on the stability of subjective price estimates, to be conducted in English because one of the experimenters did not speak Dutch
(which was indeed true). There were four parts of the experiment: 1) the
4

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

recorded for later coding. After they finished their sentence, participants
pressed a button to start the next (listening) trial.
This main study part consisted of 320 trials containing 640 items,
divided into four blocks of 80 trials, separated by breaks. Additionally,
six practice trials that contained filler words were given at the beginning. Each of the 40 target words appeared once in a listening trial and
once in a speaking trial in the first half of this experimental part (i.e.
blocks 1 or 2), and the same for the second half (blocks 3 or 4), i.e. four
times in total. The 120 control and filler words also appeared four times
throughout the experiment (twice in a listening, twice in a speaking
trial). List construction was such that each target word appeared in a
listening trial first, giving the participant the chance to learn; five trials
later, it appeared in a speaking trial to test for the success of learning.
Target words were located once as first and once as second noun of a
listening trial and the corresponding speaking trial (five trials later) in a
counterbalanced fashion. They were always paired with a control or
filler word, and never with another target word. Furthermore, if such a
word accompanying a target word was unknown, the target word was
excluded from analyses, because being exposed to two novel words in
one trial might involve different processes. None of the pairwise item
combinations of any trial was repeated in the experiment.
Post-experiment measurements and posttest
After the EEG session, we asked participants what they thought the
goal of the study was. Out of the 25 included participants, seven
mentioned that they thought it had to do with word learning; for one
participant, a record of this response is missing; and the remaining 17
did not mention anything about word learning, but believed that the
study was about price estimates. Afterwards, participants were debriefed about the real goal of the study.
Subsequently, the English vocabulary test LexTALE (Lemhöfer &
Broersma, 2012) was administered, as well as the language background
questionnaire that provided the data for Table 1. Afterwards, a final
posttest was conducted to assess longer-term learning. Pictures for all
target words were shown again in a fixed order, and had to be named in
English.

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the position of the electrodes on the
EEG cap.

clearly showed that a part of the word had been learned (e.g., floater
instead of float).
EEG data were preprocessed using the FieldTrip toolbox (htt
p://www.fieldtriptoolbox.org) in MATLAB (Oostenveld et al., 2011).
Trials were segmented from − 500 ms to 1500 ms relative to the onset of
target/control words in each sentence. A low-pass filter of 40 Hz was
applied to the EEG data (excluding EOG channels) to remove high frequency noise. A Butterworth band-pass filter (1–15 Hz, filter order of 4)
was applied to the EOG data to allow for better detection of ocular artifacts. Independent component analysis (ICA) was applied to correct
eye blinks and eye movements. Following ICA correction, artifact
rejection of the remaining noisy trials and channels was conducted
manually based on visual inspection. 10.3 % of all trials were rejected
across participants. Interpolation was performed to replace rejected
channels with the average of their neighboring channels. Baseline
correction was applied using the − 200 ms to 0 ms window prior to the
target/control word onset.
The following analyses were planned: 1) known vs. novel words:
previously unknown (targets) vs. known words (control words) in the
first block. We will refer to this factor as Word Status in the following; 2)
subsequent learning effect: previously unknown words (targets) that were
vs. were not subsequently learned in block 1 (a factor we will call
Learned Status), each compared with their respective matched known
controls. Thus, we are looking for the 2 x 2 interaction of the two factors
Word Status und Learned Status; and 3) recent learning effect: unknown
words that had or had not been learned in block 1, but now encountered
in block 2, compared with their respective matched control words, i.e.,
the Word Status x Learned Status interaction for block 2. Average voltages were plotted using FieldTrip.
EEG data were analyzed using nonparametric cluster-based permutation tests (Maris & Oostenveld, 2007). As a data-driven analysis
approach, cluster-based permutation tests require fewer a priori restrictions on the selection of time windows and electrodes for analysis,
and they control for multiple comparisons without reducing the statistical power (Candia-Rivera & Valenza, 2022). This method is ideal for
the current study as we had very few a priori expectations on the time

EEG recording, preprocessing and analysis
The EEG signal was recorded with 27 active Ag-AgCI electrodes
(actiCAP, Brain Products) embedded in an elastic cap and two additional
electrodes placed on both mastoids (see Fig. 1 for their location on the
scalp). The left mastoid electrode was used as online reference, but the
EEG was later re-referenced off-line to the average of the left and right
mastoid electrodes. Additionally, two electrodes were placed on the
outer side of both eyes, one below and one above the right eye to be able
to identify eye movements artefacts. The impedance for the electrodes
was kept below 15 kΩ. The EEG signal was amplified and sampled at a
frequency of 500 Hz. The signal was filtered online with a low cutoff of
0.01 Hz and a high cutoff of 125 Hz.
After recording, the onset times of target and matched control words
that had been measured in the audio files were imported in the EEG
signal file. Based on the participant’s behavior, each of these words
received a marker that indicated in which condition it fell, i.e., whether
it had been known (including partially known) or unknown in the pretest, and whether it had been produced correctly after input in the first
and the second half of the experiment (i.e., for target words, whether
they had been learned).1 As ‘partially known’, we regarded answers that
1

It is possible that a word was passively known to a participant, but could
not be actively produced in the pretest. We have no means to assess this in the
present data; therefore, it should be kept in mind that what we regard as ‘word
learning’ in the present study is the transition from being unable to being able
to produce a word, given its picture or concept.
5

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

window and distribution of effects, given the lack of literature on ERP
correlates of auditory word learning. Following the FieldTrip documentation (https://www.fieldtriptoolbox.org/tutorial/cluster_permutat
ion_freq/), the cluster-based permutation method first determined
spatiotemporally adjacent clusters that show a difference across experimental conditions via dependent-samples t-tests (at an alpha threshold
of 0.05). This was followed by the permutation test, in which each
cluster’s test statistic (the sum of all t-values within each cluster) was
compared to a null distribution of cluster statistics generated by 1000
Monte-Carlo permutations (i.e., randomization of data labels). P-values
of the observed clusters were calculated as the proportion of randomizations that had a larger cluster statistic than the observed effect. The
critical alpha level for permutation tests was set to p < .05.

seen from the figure, there was a steep increase of words produced fully
correctly, and a slight increase of partially correct words until the end of
the learning phase (block 2). Towards the posttest, there was a drop of
the percentage of words produced correctly due to forgetting, but a
slight increase in partially correct words.
Performance on fillers and control words was 95.60 % correct in the
pretest in the selected sample (range 74–100 %, SD = 5.08).2
Because the target words in the responses were embedded at several
places in sentences, response latencies were not measured.
ERP results
We carried out the comparisons described above. Mean and ranges of
trial numbers per cell can be found in Appendix C.

Results

Comparison 1: Known vs. Novel words, block 1

Behavioral results

The grand-averaged ERP waveforms comparing previously unknown
and known words in the first block can be found in Fig. 3 (A), along with
a plot visualizing the scalp topography (the bottom row).
The dependent-samples t-test revealed a significant negative cluster
for the effect of Word Status, i.e. for previously unknown relative to
known words from 0 to 714 ms (p < .01) and two significant positive
clusters at later intervals (766–1094 ms, p < .01; 1112–1260 ms, p =
.03) with an 18 ms gap in between them. The effects were distributed
over the whole scalp, with the effect in the second time window focusing
on posterior sites (see scalp maps). Thus, we see a negativity that includes the N400 time window (~300–500 ms), but which unexpectedly
starts already immediately after onset of the target word, followed by a

As mentioned above, we had to exclude participants with too high or
too low learning rates, or with too many EEG artifacts, because this
would leave us with too few trials per cell to analyze. However, in Appendix B, we report on the behavioral results of the complete sample of
58 participants. This large group of participants showed a qualitative
similar learning pattern to the selected group of 25 participants, but had
a slightly lower percent correct rate in the pretest, slightly less steep
learning, but less forgetting than the selected group.
Fig. 2 shows the percentage of correctly produced and partially
correctly produced target words through the course of the experiment
(pretest, the two blocks of the learning phase, and posttest). As can be

Fig. 2. Mean naming accuracy (blue or dark: % of words produced fully correctly, orange or light: % of words produced partially correctly) on the 40 target words
throughout the experiment by the selected 25 participants. Error bars represent standard errors. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend,
the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

2

If these easy words were not produced correctly, this was often due to a
misinterpretation of the picture (shown for the first time here).

6

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

Fig. 3. Grand-averaged ERPs for the first block at selected frontal, central, and posterior midline electrodes (Fz, Cz, Pz), comparing between (A) previously unknown
(red) and known (black) words, (B) spontaneously learned target words (dark pink) and matched control words (light pink), and (C) not learned target words (dark
blue) and matched control words (light blue)(N = 25). Significant clusters revealed by the permutation tests were shaded in gray. Topographic plots were included
for each significant cluster (bottom row). Electrodes that contribute to the significant clusters are shown in red. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

late positive component (LPC) at 766–1260 ms.3

the exact time of effects resulting from permutation tests cannot be
taken completely literal (Sassenhagen & Draschkow, 2019). For learned
target words, we found an early negative cluster relative to matched
control words from 0 to 526 ms (p < .01), followed by a positive cluster
at a later time window from 682 to 1150 ms (p < .01; see Fig. 3, B). The
effects were distributed over the whole scalp. For target words not
learned in block 1, we found a significant negativity from 460 to 710 ms
(p < .01) across the whole scalp, but we did not observe any significant
late positive cluster (see Fig. 3, C).
Thus, first of all, these data show that the surprisingly early negativity of Comparison 1 was mainly caused by subsequently learned
words (relative to their controls) in the very early window, followed by a
N400-like effect that however came quite late for not learned words
(starting at about 460 ms). Second, and most importantly, the LPC was
only significant for words that later turn out to be learned. The occurrence of an LPC can thus be seen as a marker for subsequent learning
success.

Comparison 2: Subsequent learning effect, block 1
For comparison 2, we compared the effects depicted in panels (B)
and (C) in Fig. 3: the effects of Word Status for targets (compared to their
known matched controls) that later turned out to be learned in block 1,
as evident from the respective production trial following the input
(listening) trial in that same block, compared to the respective effect for
those words that had not been learned. Thus, we looked for an interaction of Word Status and Learned Status.
The cluster-based permutation test revealed a significant interaction
between the two factors over the whole scalp in three time windows
(negative cluster: 54–254 ms, p < .01; positive cluster 1: 750–904 ms, p
= .01; positive cluster 2: 944–1110 ms, p = .01). The first negative
cluster is caused by the early negativity (but with a much smaller time
window than in Comparison 1) having an earlier onset for learned targets (compared to their matched controls) than for not learned targets
(also compared to their control words). The two positive clusters were
caused by the LPC, which was also larger for learned than for not learned
targets.
To explore this interaction, pairwise t-tests comparing target words
and controls for each condition separately (learned vs. not learned) were
conducted. We chose to do this for the complete time window, because

Comparison 3: Recent learning effect, block 2
Finally, we compared the EEG signatures of target words presented
in block 2 that had been learned in the previous block (as apparent in the
production trial following the input trial in block 1) with those target
words that had not been learned. Keep in mind that the number of
participants that could be included in this comparison was reduced to
22. Again, we compared each target word group (learned vs. not
learned) with their matched (known) control words as a baseline. Thus,
we were looking for the interaction between Word Status and Learned
Status, but then in the presentation following the possible learning

3
This effect is briefly interrupted by an 18 ms period of lacking significance,
probably due to the permutation method we have used; had we selected the LPC
window beforehand as most studies do, this would have gone unnoticed.

7

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

Fig. 4. Grand-averaged ERPs for the second block at selected frontal, central, and posterior midline electrodes (Fz, Cz, Pz), comparing between (A) previously
learned target words (dark pink) and matched control words (light pink), and (B) not learned target words (dark blue) and matched control words (light blue)(N =
22). Significant clusters revealed by the permutation tests are shaded in gray. Topographic plots are included for each significant cluster. Electrodes that contribute to
the significant clusters are shown in red. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

(block 2). Fig. 4 shows the EEG activity in target vs. matched control
words for those that had previously been learned (panel A) or not (panel
B). Thus, the partition of trials into conditions is the same as in Fig. 3 B
and C, but now sampled during the second presentation during a
listening trial in block 2.
The cluster-based permutation test revealed two clusters with a
significant interaction effect of Word Status and Learned Status: one
early negative cluster (266–342 ms, p = .04) which, in principle, should
signify either a larger negativity or a smaller positivity for learned words
(which is hard to see in the graphs), and a late positive cluster
(906–1060 ms, p < .01) signaling a larger LPC for not learned words.
The follow-up t-test that compared only learned target words and
their matched controls did not reveal any significant cluster (see Fig. 4.,
A). However, when comparing not learned target words and their
matched controls, we found two negative clusters at early time windows
(0–112 ms, p = .01; 266–370 ms, p = .04) as well as one positive cluster
at a later interval (822–1074 ms, p < .01) (see Fig. 4, B).4
In our view, both early negativities can be seen as instances of the
longer early negativity already observed for comparison 1: previously
unknown words (in this case, words encountered once, but not learned)

give rise to early negativities compared to well-known control words.
The much larger LPC for not yet learned vs. previously learned words
as visible in Fig. 4 was confirmed by the permutation tests, albeit only in
a restricted time window (interaction: 906–1060 ms, not learned words
only: 822–1074 ms). This is very likely due to power issues, given that
on the basis of their learned / not learned distribution, only 22 participants could be included in this comparison, and cell sizes were rather
low in some cells (see Appendix C). Fig. 4, however, shows a pattern that
is clear and meaningful: target words already learned in the previously
block already ‘behaved’ like long-known words in terms of their EEG
signature, while target words that had been encountered equally often,
but not successfully learned, showed basically the same ERP signature as
completely novel words (see Fig. 3, A).
Discussion
In the present study, we used a paradigm based on scripted dialogue
to study the electrophysiological correlates of incidental L2 word
learning. The underlying aim was to simulate the spontaneous ‘picking
up’ of new words in a conversation in a second language. The study
differed in many respects from prior studies. For instance, this paradigm
resembles natural dialogue as closely as possible in a controlled EEGlaboratory setting. The majority (71 %) of participants did not detect

4
The negativities in the two early time windows are hard to see in the three
central electrodes in Fig. 4, in particular the second negativity, which was the
least significant of all found effects (p =.04). To understand this result better,
Appendix D shows an electrode (O2) where this effect is more visible, with a
slight negative inflection for not learned words compared to their matched
controls.

8

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

the learning aspect of the study.5 Importantly, encoding (or learning)
and retrieval (or testing) of the new words were embedded in the same
dialogue game. For the sake of the probably most face-valid definition of
truly ‘knowing’ a word (i.e., being able to produce it), retrieval was
assessed by way of production or ‘cued recall’, rather than recognition as
in the majority of memory studies. Unlike most previous word learning
studies using EEG, the newly learned words in our study were real English words, to be learned by advanced L2 English speakers, who were
‘covertly’ individually pre-tested on their (missing) knowledge of these
target words. Word presentation was only auditory, as is natural for a
dialogue, and not visual as in most memory or word recognition studies.
Overall, we were interested in (1) ERP correlates of encountering a
spoken novel word compared to an already known word in general, (2)
whether these correlates were predictive of subsequent remembering,
and (3) how learned vs. not learned novel words ‘behaved’ during a
second exposure (relative to already known words). In what follows, we
will discuss how all these results are related to findings from both word
processing and memory literature.
For all three comparisons, we would like to acknowledge that our
final sample size, after having recruited more than 60 participants, is on
the low side (N = 25 and N = 22). The reasons for this are specified
above, and are due to the fact that for our performance-based condition
splits, only ‘intermediate’ learners with a good balance of learned and
not learned words could be used. No prior word learning study, to our
knowledge, has performed the same split, maybe due to this extreme
restriction, but leading to a gap in our knowledge about learningdependent ERP signatures of L2 word acquisition that we aimed to fill;
future studies may want to turn to a word recognition rather than production study to avoid the enormous loss of participants (see, e.g.,
Bakker et al., 2015, who used a word recognition / matching paradigm).
It should however be noted that the ERP field has only recently started to
use sample sizes above 25; for a comparison, the study by Bakker et al.
(2015) had 22 participants, and that by Batterink & Neville (2011) had
20. Among all 14 studies cited in the present paper that used ERPs, only
two have a sample size clearly above 25 (Chen & Chen, 2023: 35; Zhang
et al., 2023: 50).

In (L1) word recognition studies, Ziegler et al. (1997) observed an
“N400” for pseudowords vs. words in a semantic categorization task as
early as 75 ms, while Supp et al. (2004), in an auditory lexical decision
task, reported an “N400” as late as 500–700 ms. Conversely, Baart and
Samuel (2015) observed lexicality effects during auditory word processing that started 200 ms after onset of the syllable that determined
lexicality, and that (even though later windows were not analyzed)
seemed to last until about 700 ms. Thus, in the word recognition literature, the typically observed N400 effect for unknown lexical items
(pseudowords) as compared to words has more often been seen to begin
and / or end outside the classical N400 time window.
On the other hand, the recognition memory literature identifies two
negativities typically elicited by new vs. old items, a frontal negativity
from 300-500 ms (also called ‘FN400′) and a left parietal negativity from
about 500 to 800 ms (Curran & Cleary, 2003; Duarte et al., 2004; Rugg &
Curran, 2007). It should however be considered that these effects are
obtained during retrieval and not, as in our study, during encoding.
Furthermore, considering that in our study, we had auditory presentations of complete sentences tied to a complex and incidentallearning price comparison task, it is conceivable that our observed effects are not as focused as in visual single-item learning or lexical decision studies (with contextually isolated word stimuli). For instance,
the early onset of the negativity might be partly due to the fact that
participants already saw the pictures of an upcoming listening trial two
seconds before the onset of the auditory phrase. That is, participants
could already anticipate on the occurrence of an unknown and to-belearned word, possibly accelerating the onset of the detection of such
a target item. In general, however, the negativity itself fits both with the
idea of increased effort for lexical-semantic processing that is usually
attributed to the N400 in language studies (Kutas & Federmeier, 2010;
Lau et al., 2008; Rabovsky et al., 2018), as well as with failed retrieval
from long-term memory when comparing novel to already known
words. The broad distribution of our observed effect over the whole
scalp, however, fits more with a ‘linguistic’ N400 than with the negativities reported in the recognition memory literature (frontal or leftparietal).
Late in the analysis window (~750 ms), our observed negativity for
novel words turned into a positivity, which was rather unexpected on
the grounds of earlier psycholinguistic or recognition memory studies.
As mentioned above, recognition memory studies typically observe only
a negativity for ‘new’ vs. ‘old’ items in the retrieval phase, which is
however different from the current situation where the EEG measures
were collected during encoding. In word learning and processing
studies, Holcomb et al. (2002) observed an N400 for pseudowords that
extended into a later time window (550–800 ms). Similarly, Bakker et al.
(2015), Borovsky et al. (2010), in a semantically high-constraint condition) and, at least descriptively, Mestres-Missé et al. (2007; the later
time window was not analyzed) observed more negative ERPs in an ‘LPC
window’ (500–700 ms) for novel vs. existing words. Thus, all these
studies would lead to the expectation of a negativity, not a positivity, for
novel words at later time windows. However, none of these studies
looked at a time window after 700 or 800 ms. Batterink and Neville
(2011), in their study of pseudowords replacing real words in sentences,
did not find a difference between real and pseudowords in an LPC
window from 500 to 900 ms at first presentation of an item.
Yet, our observed LPC effect seems to be compatible with some
studies on word repetition in discourse. Van Petten et al. (1991)
observed that words that had not previously been mentioned in a text
gave rise to an increased N400 and a larger LPC compared to repeated
words. A similar result, albeit restricted to certain conditions (items
congruent with sentence context, or short repetition lag, non-living
items, and young adults as participants), was obtained by Besson et al.
(1992) and by Zhou et al. (2015). Analogously, it is conceivable that the
already known words in our study might be considered as ‘repeated’
words (as they are probably used in participants’ daily life), while the
unknown words can be likened to ‘new’ words in these studies.

Incidentally encountering new (previously unknown) L2 words compared
to already known words
In the first comparison, we aimed at identifying the ERP correlates of
hearing, for the first time, an L2 word that one did not know before. The
previous psycholinguistic and memory literature, especially in the
context of L1 word processing and learning, had mainly pointed at
negativities, either earlier in an N400 window or later in the LPC window, for novel words (compared to already known words) or ‘new’
stimuli (compared to known words or previously studied stimuli).
We observed a sustained and broadly distributed negativity for unknown relative to known words in block 1 that spanned the usual N400
window (300–500 ms after onset of the critical word), but occurred
much earlier and lasted longer (from 0 to ~ 700 ms), followed by a
positivity from about 750 to 1250 ms. First, while the negativity for
novel words was expected, its time course is uncanonical. It resembles
“mismatch negativity” effects from auditory speech segmentation as
observed by De Diego Balaguer et al. (2007), where (rule-violating)
nonwords elicited a similarly early negativity compared to words until
about 400 ms, which was also followed by a larger LPC from about 600
ms onwards. However, in that study, this pattern was interpreted as a
correlate of phonotactic rule extraction, which we did not manipulate.
5

This percentage was much higher (98%) in the original version of the
experiment (de Vos, Schriefers, ten Bosch, et al., 2019), where the dialogue
partner was a real person. A dialogue with a real confederate was however not
feasible, and not sufficiently standardized in terms of auditory input, in an EEG
context.
9

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

Finally, to anticipate on the discussion of the following comparison,
the ‘subsequent memory’ effect, it is clear that the LPC can indicate the
submission of new information to declarative memory, with its size
correlating with later recall success (Fernández et al., 1999). In that
context, it is not surprising that our novel words elicited this ERP
component, as we will discuss in the following section.

studies, our results were even more clearcut than we had expected:
Novel words that had been successfully learned (and produced) in the
previous block became statistically indistinguishable from known words
(‘matched controls’) in terms of ERPs. In contrast, novel words that had
been presented, but not yet learned, displayed a similar pattern as novel
words presented for the first time, namely an early (but now not as
sustained) negativity, and a positivity in a late LPC window.
This result is in accordance with findings showing a convergence of
ERP signatures for known words vs. novel words or pseudowords as the
latter are repeated or trained (Bakker et al., 2015; Frishkoff et al., 2010;
Mestres-Missé et al., 2007). However, these studies all involved explicit
rather than incidental learning, and a much more intensive training, or a
higher number of repetitions, than a single exposure as in the present
study. More importantly, none of these studies included a condition in
which presented, but not learned novel words were also compared to
already known words. In other words, none of the earlier studies took
learning success for the novel words into account. It is this inclusion of
not learned novel words − that still showed differences to already
known words in a second exposure − that lets us rule out the possibility
that the missing effects for successfully learned novel words vs. known
words are due to a lack of power (given that the number of participants
qualifying for this comparison was reduced to 22).
One surprising aspect of this finding is that the ERP convergence of
just learned and long-known words happened in block 2, i.e. after only
one exposure in block 1. It has to be considered, though, that for each
novel word that qualified as a ‘target’ for a participant, the respective
participant had shown a failed naming attempt in the pretest (otherwise,
the target would have been excluded). We have previously shown that
such failed naming attempts produce the noticing of ‘vocabulary holes’
in L2 learners, which promote subsequent learning (de Vos, Schriefers, &
Lemhöfer, 2019). Furthermore, each word that contributed to this
condition had been successfully pronounced by the learner in the previous block. Possibly, our fast learning results would not have been quite
as fast if it had not been for this pretest and the successful naming
attempt.
In the psycholinguistic word learning literature, it is typically
assumed that full lexicalization, i.e. the integration of new words into
(semantic) verbal memory, requires over-night consolidation (see Palma
& Titone, 2021, for a review). Most evidence for this consolidation claim
comes from behavioral studies, which use, for instance, semantic
priming or form-related inhibition as indices for lexicalization, showing
that these connections between old and newly learned words only surface fully after sleep (Clay et al., 2007; Davis et al., 2009; Dumay &
Gaskell, 2007; Tamminen & Gaskell, 2013). In contrast to this account,
some researchers have argued, especially for a certain form of incidental
word learning called ‘fast mapping procedure’, for the existence of a fast
learning mechanism that integrates novel words into semantic word
memory without a lengthy consolidation period or even without hippocampal involvement (Atir-Sharon et al., 2015; Coutanche &
Thompson-Schill, 2014; Merhav et al., 2015; Sharon et al., 2011; but see
also Cooper et al., 2019; Gaskell & Lindsay, 2019).
It is currently unclear what either the consolidation or the Fast
Mapping accounts would predict in terms of ERP signatures, but our
result of fast convergence of just learned novel and already known words
in terms of ERPs seems compatible with fast lexical learning; for
instance, Bakker et al. (2015) and Kaczer et al. (2018) show that ERP
signatures reflect the status of consolidation in lexical memory. These
studies, however, include a second session after one or two days, which
we did not, nor did we collect established behavioral indices of lexicalization like form competition or semantic priming. The two studies
also identify the N400 more than the LPC as a reflection of lexicalization,
a finding that we do not really replicate (our negativity for not yet
learned words is very small, descriptively). All in all, our data do not
directly speak to the issue of consolidation and lexicalization.

Successfully vs. Unsuccessfully encoding novel words
In the second comparison, we split the trials of encountering novel
words in block 1, as described above, into those that later turned out to
have led to successful learning (because the respective target word was
produced correctly in a later production trial) and those that did not.
Both categories of novel words were compared to their respective
matched known words (‘matched controls’). We observed that the larger
LPC for novel relative to known words was restricted to those novel
words that were subsequently learned, which showed a large effect from
about 700 to 1150 ms post word onset. In contrast, there was no LPC
effect for not learned novel words. We also found that the early onset of
the earlier negativity (0 ms, lasting until ~ 550 ms) was also restricted to
the learned targets, while the not learned targets showed, as only effect,
a later negativity from ~ 450 to 700 ms.
While the fact that both groups of novel words showed a negativity is
compatible with the idea of the negativity signaling failed lexical access
(i.e., retrieval from word memory) for these previously unknown words,
we do not have an explanation for the difference in the latency of the
effect. One bold speculation is that an early anticipation of an upcoming
to-be-learned novel word on the basis of the previously presented picture pair, as mentioned above, may have been more conducive to subsequent learning than no such anticipation.
More importantly in terms of the assumed memory mechanisms in
the current incidental L2 word learning paradigm, we replicated the
‘subsequent memory’ effect on the LPC that has previously been reported in recognition memory studies (Friedman & Johnson, 2000;
Paller et al., 1987; Paller et al., 1988; Schott et al., 2002; Van Petten &
Senkfor, 1996), in a recent explicit L2 word learning study (Zhang et al.,
2023), as well as in one L1 word learning study in which pseudowords
replaced real words in sentences (Batterink & Neville, 2011). Because of
the dependence of the LPC on learning outcomes, this ERP component
can be linked to successful declarative memory formation, which is in
accordance with its neural sources like the hippocampus (Fernández
et al., 1999; Friedman & Johnson, 2000). In other words, the size of the
LPC, obtained in a naturalistic situation where novel words appeared
‘covertly’ in a partner’s utterance, predicted the likelihood of these
novel words being picked up by the L2 speaker. That is, neither the fact
that this learning was incidental, nor that it was about L2 words presented in a much more ‘noisy’ task than in typical list learning experiments, nor that we used cued recall rather than recognition as a test,
prevented the occurrence of such subsequent memory effects.
While it seems unsurprising that declarative memory processes are
involved in the present task, incidental L2 word learning in a nearrealistic situation like dialogue has never been investigated from this
angle. In fact, most L2 word learning studies to date have investigated
only the consequences, not the process, of learning (e.g., whether it gives
rise to semantic priming effects), and few of them adopted a memory
perspective. This may also be partly due to the fact that assessing the
subsequent memory effect requires a balanced distribution of novel
word trials that lead and do not lead to learning, which is only the case
for some participants and can only be determined after testing, resulting
in a large number of excluded participants (as in our case).
Immediate consequences of L2 word learning
In our third comparison, we turned to block 2 and compared novel
and already known L2 words depending on whether the former had just,
in block 1, been learned or not. In the absence of any comparable prior
10

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

What does the LPC during exposure to novel words reflect?

likely have led to much less learning (see de Vos et al., 2019, for learning
results in such a variant of the task). Thus, whether it can be called ‘truly
incidental’ or not, our aim was to study the processes during the ‘picking-up’ of a word in a dialogue-like situation, be it with or without an
intrinsic intention to learn. Finally, the fact that only a minority our
participants (29 %) thought that the study was about word learning
showed that most participants’ major intention was on producing and
judging the price comparisons, and not on learning words. While the
present, already small sample could not be further divided, it would
however be very interesting for future research to address the question
whether these participants showed different results from the other group
of 29 % who suspected a certain word learning goal in the study (see de
Vos, Schriefers, & Lemhöfer (2019) for such an analysis by learning
awareness).

Given the significance of the LCP as a marker of episodic memory
retrieval (e.g., Rugg & Curran, 2007; Peters & Daum, 2009), one could
be led to assume that our LPC was reversely related to the strength of the
episodic memory representation for the previous encounters with a
word. If a novel word is forgotten, the reason for this is probably the too
weak memory trace it has left in episodic memory, compared to a novel
remembered word, or a word known before (which also leaves a trace
for the episode during which it was presented). This would explain the
effects we see in block 2 (comparison 3), but it falls short of explaining
the subsequent memory effect in block 1 (comparison 2): because this
effect is predictive of subsequent learning, it appears to be an effect of
memory encoding rather than retrieval.
There are however two more possibilities we see at this moment for
the interpretation of the LPC in our data. First, it is possible that the LPC
on not yet learned novel words in block 2 is in fact a subsequent memory
effect for a potential next block, just as it was in block 1. The behavioral
data show that after block 1, about 60 % of target words remained to be
learned, of which participants, on average, learned about 30 % (taking
the remaining 60 % as the new total). Analyzing these two groups of
novel words separately in terms of the EEG to calculate a new subsequent memory effect was impossible due to too small cell sizes. This
would mean that the LPC for all not yet learned novel words in block 2
(Fig. 4 B) would have been driven by those words learned in this block.
The third and last, but possibly related option is that all not-yet
learned new words received a special kind of ‘attention for learning’
(and, possibly, more so than in block 1), since learners were probably
aware that they had not yet succeeded in producing them; already
learned novel words did not need to receive this attention any more.
This would be compatible with an account of LPC as “a potential marker
of high-quality, long-lasting learning attention” (Turk et al., 2018, p.
1327). This interpretation is not only in line with memory findings,
especially regarding the subsequent memory LPC effect, but also with
results from non-memory studies showing that the LPC is larger during
the exposure to stimuli that are more task-relevant (Eugster et al., 2014;
Kissler et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2019).
The two latter accounts are reconcilable with each other when one
assumes that the kind of attention that the LPC signals promotes
learning; the more attention is allocated to a learning episode, e.g.
because of a recently experienced failed naming attempt, the more likely
it is that it will be learned. This is also in line with a visual inspection of
the block 1 data (Fig. 3) in which not subsequently learned novel words
(panel C) seem to display a small LPC descriptively, which however does
not reach significance. Still, these novel words might have received a
slightly larger portion of attention than already known words, but not
enough to enable learning up to being able to produce the word.

Conclusion
The current study examined the electrophysiological correlates of
incidental L2 word learning in dialogue. In particular, we adopted a
perspective that bridges the classical memory and classical word processing literature to understand what happens in the brain during the
incidental encounter and, possibly, learning of an L2 word that has
previously been unknown to the speaker. Our results show, first, that
hearing novel words elicits a negativity that is broadly compatible with
both the N400 reported in the psycholinguistic literature for pseudowords and novel words, and for ‘new’ stimuli in the recognition memory
literature. In line with the memory literature, but unexpected in terms of
the word recognition literature, there also was an LPC effect for novel
words that was predictive of subsequent learning. Finally, the ERP results of the second block show that ERP signatures for newly learned
words became indistinguishable from those for ‘old’ words already after
one exposure, while old-new differences, especially the LPC, were
retained for new, not yet learned words. One possible explanation for
this finding is the interpretation of the LPC as a marker of ‘attention for
learning’. These results advance our understanding of the neural underpinnings of the process of L2 speakers ‘picking up’ new words
spontaneously in daily-life situations.
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kristin Lemhöfer: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Anqi Lei: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Anne
Mickan: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization.

A note on the incidental nature of learning in the present paradigm
In the current study, we regard word learning as ‘incidental’ because,
first, there was no explicit instruction to learn, and second, by using the
price comparisons as a cover task, we concealed the learning goal of the
study. In the memory literature, learning is typically regarded as ‘incidental’ when participants, prior to the learning phase, are not made
aware of the (specific) learning goal, e.g. by the announcement of a
subsequent memory test (e.g., Eagle & Leiter, 1964; Paller et al., 1987);
our use of the term is consistent with this. However, we do acknowledge
that the nature of the dialogue paradigm, which alternated between
listening (learning) and speaking (testing) trials, and which was moreover preceded by a covert pretest, likely caused a certain intrinsic
intention to learn in the participants. We could only have avoided this by
turning the task into a purely perceptive listening task with a subsequent, surprising memory test. This would however have fallen short of
simulating the dialogue situation we were interested in and would most

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
Parts of these data have been collected in the context of a Master
thesis by Julia Egger. We also thank Iris Verpaalen for help with data
collection and Jochem Koopmans for help with data management.
This work was supported by the Dutch Research Council (NWO) (vidi
grant to K. Lemhöfer, no. 276-89-004).

11

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

Appendix A

Table A1
Novel (target) words and their matched control words.
Target word

Matched control word

anvil
apron
bib
bobbin
bridle
buckle
chisel
colander
float
funnel
hinge
ladle
level
maraca
mortar
onesie
peeler
peg
pennant
plunger

pencil
apple
bed
balloon
book
bottle
candle
camera
fork
flower
ring
table
lighter
banana
mirror
tissue
guitar
bag
painting
pillow
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​

Target word

Matched control word

raft
rake
rattle
saucer
scooter
scythe
skimmer
squeegee
swatter
syringe
tassel
thimble
top
tripod
turnip
valve
vise
whisk
wrench
yarn

tent
sock
racket
helmet
necklace
soap
muffin
barbie
wallet
shower
toilet
hammer
cup
laptop
towel
key
vase
clock
watch
car

Filler words
airplane, arrow, backpack, ball, battery, bell, belt, bicycle, bikini, blouse, boat, boomerang, boot, bra, bread, brush, bucket, bus, button, cd, chain,
chair, couch, cross, crown, curtain, doll, door, dreamcatcher, dress, earring, egg, fridge, frisbee, gameboy, glass, glove, goal, helicopter, jacket,
keyboard, knife, lamp, lipstick, magnet, microphone, microwave, mouse, newspaper, orange, pan, paperclip, pen, perfume, piano, plant, plate,
pumpkin, radio, rope, sausage, scarf, shoe, skateboard, skirt, smartphone, spoon, stamp, straw, suit, suitcase, swing, t-shirt, tape, telephone, television,
tie, toothbrush, train, umbrella.
Appendix B

Table B1
Mean naming accuracy on the 40 target words throughout the experiment of the complete set of 58 participants.
Pretest

% correct
% partially correct

Learning phase, block 1

Learning phase, block 2

Posttest

Mean (SD)

Range

Mean (SD)

Range

Mean (SD)

Range

Mean (SD)

Range

5.52 (7.45)
1.29 (1.94)

0–27.50
0–7.50

31.62 (20.24)
3.93 (3.87)

5.00–77.50
0–15.00

43.73 (24.56)
4.87 (4.15)

7.50–95.00
0–17.50

39.44 (23.64)
5.34 (4.53)

5.00–97.50
0–25.00

Table B2
Mean naming accuracy on the 40 target words throughout the experiment of the remaining N = 25 participants.
Pretest

% correct
% partially correct

Learning phase, block 1

Learning phase, block 2

Posttest

Mean (SD)

Range

Mean (SD)

Range

Mean (SD)

Range

Mean (SD)

Range

7.70 (8.19)
1.70 (2.13)

0–27.50
0–7.50

38.40 (13.25)
5.50 (4.27)

12.50–70.00
0–15.00

55.60 (13.87)
5.90 (4.26)

32.50–85.00
0–12.50

48.00 (14.40)
7.20 (5.56)

17.50–85.50
0–25.00

12

K. Lemhöfer et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104585

Appendix C
Table C1
Mean and range of numbers of trials per condition for the ERP analyses.
Condition

Mean

Range (Min-Max)

​

​
​

​

​

​

​

​
​

​

Block 1
Comparison 1: Known vs novel words
Novel words (targets)
Known words (matched controls)
Comparison 2: Subsequent learning effect
Subsequently learned targets
Matched controls for subsequently learned targets
Not subsequently learned targets
Matched controls for not learned targets

33
31
13
13
20
20

21–40
11–39

Block 2
Comparison 3: Recent learning effect
Previously learned targets
Matched controls for previously learned targets
Previously not learned targets
Matched controls for previously not learned targets

13
12
21
19

7–24
7–23
8–29
10–29

7–23
7–23
11–30
11–30

Appendix D
Illustration of the negativity in the time window 266–370 ms in comparison 3 (block 2) for not yet learned novel words vs. controls.

Fig. D1. Grand-averaged ERPs for the first block at electrode O2 comparing between not learned target words (dark blue) and matched control words (light blue) in
block 2 (N = 22). The area shaded in gray shows the effect at the time window.

Data availability

Bermúdez-Margaretto, B., Beltrán, D., Domínguez, A., & Cuetos, F. (2015). Repeated
exposure to “meaningless” pseudowords modulates LPC, but not N(FN)400. Brain
Topography, 28(6), 838–851. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10548-014-0403-5
Besson, M., Kutas, M., & Petten, C. V. (1992). An event-related potential (ERP) analysis of
semantic congruity and repetition effects in sentences. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 4(2), 132–149. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1992.4.2.132
Boehm, S. G., & Sommer, W. (2005). Neural correlates of intentional and incidental
recognition of famous faces. Cognitive Brain Research, 23(2), 153–163. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.10.008
Borovsky, A., Kutas, M., & Elman, J. (2010). Learning to use words: Event-related
potentials index single-shot contextual word learning. Cognition, 116(2), 289–296.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.05.004
Candia-Rivera, D., & Valenza, G. (2022). Cluster permutation analysis for EEG series
based on non-parametric Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney statistical tests. SoftwareX, 19,
Article 101170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2022.101170
Chen, B., Ma, T., Liang, L., & Liu, H. (2017). Rapid L2 word learning through high
constraint sentence context: An event-related potential study. Frontiers in Psychology,
8(2285). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02285
Chen, J., & Chen, B. (2023). Learning new meanings for known L2 words: Long-term
semantic representation is updated to integrate new information after consolidation.
Psychophysiology, 60(5). https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.14228
Christian, A. M., & Paterson, D. G. (1936). Growth of vocabulary in later maturity.
Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied, 1, 167–169.
Clay, F., Bowers, J. S., Davis, C. J., & Hanley, D. A. (2007). Teaching adults new words:
The role of practice and consolidation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 33(5), 970–976. https://doi.org/10.1037/02787393.33.5.970

The raw data and analysis scripts are available at the Radboud Data
Repository (https://doi.org/10.34973/24y8-q773).
