Introduction
The compartmentalization of scientific knowledge is so often
lamented that it could be concluded that this seemingly undesirable
property is an inevitable concomitant of how focused scientific discov­
ery operates (see Merton, 1961). But when the overlap between separate
fields of investigation becomes evident, integration of the complemen­
tary explorations is called for. This article examines a particular case,
long-term semantic interference resulting from generative activity,
where parallel research efforts in language production and memory
retrieval research sectors have remained stubbornly separate despite
their seeming complementarity. Although this compartmentalization
has not prevented important and fundamental discoveries in each field,
we argue that separation is no longer justifiable. The segregated

discoveries are overdue for integration into a larger memory-language
framework that accommodates the discoveries of each subfield, aligns
their frameworks, and points to future synthetic directions. We present a
proof-of-concept experiment that adopts language production proced­
ures in a multi-phase retrieval induced forgetting design in support of the
case for an integrated adaptive learning approach to semantic
interference.
Semantic interference has been studied independently in subfields of
memory and language production for decades using framings and pro­
cedures that obscure the underlying commonality between the fields.
Semantic activation is principally facilitatory, such that concepts and
words that are related to generated or comprehended meanings are
coactivated through spreading activation processes (e.g., Collins &
Loftus, 1975; Neely, 1977). Although simple priming paradigms show

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: channinghambric@gmail.com (C.E. Hambric).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2024.104570
Received 6 February 2024; Received in revised form 6 September 2024; Accepted 11 September 2024
Available online 17 September 2024
0749-596X/© 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

that facilitation from such coactivation is fleeting, other work has shown
that semantic coactivation can induce long-term facilitation under
certain conditions (e.g., Joordens & Becker, 1997; Becker et al., 1997),
or selectively strengthen the accessibility of particular conceptuallexical mappings (Rodd et al., 2004; Rodd et al., 2013; Rodd et al.,
2017). These findings suggest that strengthened access in comprehen­
sion is the result of long-term learning mechanisms. Crucially, in cir­
cumstances involving meaning-based generation, long-term adaptation
results in both strengthening of selected meanings (or their lexical
connections) and downregulation of unselected, coactivated meanings
(Norman et al., 2007; Oppenheim et al., 2010). Specifically, generation
strengthens access to retrieved meanings and induces interference to
related material in tasks such as memory retrieval or picture naming in
which a single option is selected from among multiple coactivated
conceptual-lexical alternatives (e.g., Anderson et al., 1994; Norman
et al., 2007; Schnur et al., 2009; Oppenheim et al., 2010). Separate
memory (retrieval-induced forgetting) and language production (espe­
cially continuous picture naming) literatures show that the accessibility
of conceptual-semantic or linked lexical representations varies as a
function of recent retrieval experience (e.g., Brown, 1981; Johnson &
Anderson, 2004; Howard et al., 2006; Norman et al., 2007; Schnur et al.,
2009; Oppenheim et al., 2010; Anderson & Hulbert, 2021). Although a
number of language production researchers have pointed to parallels
between the two fields (e.g., Oppenheim et al., 2010; de Zubicaray et al.,
2015; Navarrete et al., 2021), and both fields ostensibly describe mod­
ulations within conceptual-lexical networks, they focus on different as­
pects of the problem space and remain largely segregated. In the
memory literature, accounts of retrieval-induced forgetting address an
undifferentiated semantic memory stratum and generally omit consid­
eration of lexical retrieval and selection, though these are clearly
implicated in the verbal tasks that experiments employ (Anderson et al.,
1994; Jonker et al., 2013; Norman et al., 2007). One influential account
explicitly postulates adaptations within this memory stratum as the basis
of semantic interference (Norman et al., 2007). Conversely, language
production researchers for the most part ascribe long-term semantic
interference in continuous naming to weakened links between concep­
tual representations and pre-phonological words (lemmas), with some
researchers proposing that the links are to higher level lexical concepts
(Belke, 2013; Doring et al., 2022). Regardless of whether conceptual
features link to lexical concepts or to lemmas, these language models
rely on oversimplified or underspecified conceptual-semantic repre­
sentations and do not address the possibility of the dynamic changes
within them that are postulated in some memory accounts. In our view,
there is no strong reason to exclude either possibility. Based on current
evidence, semantic interference may entail dynamic changes within
conceptual representations (e.g., Norman et al., 2007), adaptations to
conceptual-lexical links (e.g., Oppenheim et al., 2010), or both. Impor­
tantly, in relation to the theme of the special issue on the languagememory interface, we thus do not view memory and language as sepa­
rate spheres but rather as intrinsic components of a conceptual-linguistic
system in which long-term conceptual memory representations are often
evoked through language. We now consider aspects of the relevant
language production and memory literatures in more detail.

such as lexical concepts and lemmas (e.g., Levelt et al., 1999). As a
result, words that share semantic features become coactive as activation
spreads throughout the conceptual-lexical network (e.g., Dell &
O’Seaghdha, 1992; Levelt et al., 1999; Rapp & Goldrick, 2000). This
coactivation is inherently facilitatory: It strengthens later access to
selected targets, and in some circumstances, such as naming pictures of
members of the same category in immediate succession, it results in
short-term facilitation of responses (Neely, 1977; Lupker, 1988; Nav­
arrete et al., 2014; Scaltritti et al., 2017). However, in other circum­
stances such as continuous picture naming where related items are not
contiguous, later access to unselected coactivated words is impaired
(Howard et al., 2006; Schnur et al., 2009). The semantic interference effect
in language production is thus the phenomenon in which it takes longer
to retrieve and produce words after retrieving and producing related
words (e.g., Vitkovitch & Humphries, 1993; Wheeldon & Monsell, 1994;
Damian et al., 2001; Howard et al., 2006; Oppenheim et al., 2010; Abdel
Rahman & Melinger, 2011; Schnur, 2014; Gordon et al., 2018).
Semantic interference is observed in picture-word procedures (e.g.,
Schriefers et al., 1990) where printed distractor words are superimposed
on pictures, and in cyclic naming, where participants repeatedly name
small sets of related or unrelated pictures in rapid succession (e.g.,
Damian et al., 2001). Critically, interference is also observed in the
continuous picture naming paradigm where there are substantial, con­
structed lags between related items. In this paradigm, following an
initial familiarization procedure, participants name pictures in a single
stream that has been internally structured so that related items are
dispersed throughout the sequence (Howard et al., 2006). This means
that speakers are generally not aware of the manipulations, that short
term facilitation between related items is absent, and that the cumula­
tive negative effects of ordinal position within sequences are plausibly
due to long-term adaptive mechanisms rather than to momentary se­
lection difficulty (Howard et al., 2006; Oppenheim et al., 2010). We
focus on this paradigm in the current work because it lends itself most
naturally to fusion with memory procedures and because the pictureword and cyclic naming procedures may involve strategies and control
processes that complicate data interpretation (Mahon et al., 2007; Belke
& Stielow, 2013; Navarette et al., 2014; Hambric & O’Séaghdha, 2023).
In the continuous naming task, experiments reliably show a linear in­
crease in naming time over the ordinal positions of related items, such
that the time it takes to name a picture increases substantially with each
ordinal position (Howard et al., 2006; Oppenheim et al., 2010; Schnur,
2014). Given that interference increases with each related production,
this pattern of semantic interference is referred to as cumulative
interference.
What drives cumulative semantic interference? In some accounts,
interference is attributed to an increase in the concurrent activation of
previously selected lexical concepts at the moment of current target
selection (e.g., Roelofs, 2018; Abdel Rahman & Melinger, 2019). To
account for the long-term effects in the continuous naming paradigm,
the heightened accessibility of recently selected lexical concepts was
implemented as a bias term in WEAVER++ model simulations by Roe­
lofs (2018). The bias is temporary and needs to be maintained by
frequent reuse within a picture naming procedure (Roelofs, 2018). In
contrast, and of particular interest here, adaptive learning accounts hold
that word accessibility is shaped by an error-driven learning mechanism
(Howard et al., 2006; Oppenheim et al., 2010). According to the earlier
account of Howard et al. (2006), cumulative interference is the result of
modulation to the mappings between concepts and lemmas. When a
word is selected for production, the links between the target’s concep­
tual representation and lemma are strengthened, thus making this word
more competitive when a relative is later generated. That is, long-term
strengthening of previous targets, rather than bias, is at the root of cu­
mulative interference. Crucially, Oppenheim et al.’s (2010) “Dark Side”
model extends the Howard et al. (2006) account by proposing that
whereas links to selected words are strengthened, links to activated but
unselected words are also weakened during name generation.

Semantic interference in language production
In language production research, production of words is often stud­
ied through timed picture naming tasks that require generation of names
from memory. Pictures are assumed to activate conceptual knowledge
and corresponding sectors of the lexicon from which the most felicitous,
pragmatically fitting name is selected. Picture naming is thus a proxy for
the general process of conceptually-driven word retrieval. When
speakers produce an individual picture name, they first activate the
concept they wish to convey. Semantic concepts, often construed as
distributed semantic features (see Kumar, 2021; Lambon-Ralph et al.,
2017 for reviews), link to corresponding abstract lexical representations,
2

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

Specifically, this simple two-layer, feed-forward model has a single
learning algorithm with two “sides”: one that increases the connection
weights from active semantic features to selected words, and one that
decreases weights from shared features to unselected coactivated words.
In sum, according to this model, a single learning mechanism
strengthens access to chosen targets and weakens access to unselected
competitors (Oppenheim et al., 2010). In this view, selection difficulty
arises due to previous downregulation of semantic competitors and not
primarily from increased competition from strengthened relatives.
Indeed, though strengthened access to previously generated words oc­
curs, Oppenheim et al. show through simulations that it may not play a
role in long-term semantic interference (see Oppenheim & Nozari, 2024;
Oppenheim, 2024 for additional discussion). Thus a key claim of
Oppenheim et al. (2010) is that since competitive lexical selection is not
necessary to capture semantic interference in continuous picture
naming, long-term interference is primarily driven by adaptive learning
processes. We note here that in making this claim, Oppenheim et al.
(2010) pointed to the general parallels between semantic interference in
language production and retrieval-induced forgetting and to the corre­
spondences between theoretical debates in the two fields. As discussed
below, in the field of retrieval-induced forgetting, some researchers
posit that forgetting may be due to strengthened generated items
“occluding” retrieval of ungenerated relatives, while others attribute it
to mechanisms that directly affect the representations of semantically
related activated items during retrieval (see Anderson, 2020, for
review).
Returning to the broader characterization of language production
accounts of semantic interference, models such as that of Oppenheim
et al. (2010) focus on the accessibility and selection of lexical repre­
sentations without consideration of processes internal to the level of
conceptual representation (see Oppenheim & Nozari, 2024, for a related
point). The work by Abdel Rahman & Melinger (2011), which posits that
relatedness of thematically related concepts is construed “on the fly”
through activation of situational knowledge, may be considered an
exception. But, to our knowledge, no current account considers the
possibility that change within the conceptual representations themselves
either drives or contributes to interference phenomena. In the next
section, we will review an influential account of semantic interference in
memory (Norman et al., 2007) in which modulations within a concep­
tual (semantic memory) stratum drive long-term changes in semantic
accessibility.

times to increase the rate of successful retrieval and potentially the
strength of interference. Participants then engage in a distractor task
(typically 15–20 min) before completing a final memory assessment
phase involving all items (typically also using category-stem or category
cues). There are two key conditions in this phase.1 The Activated con­
dition contains new members of the same categories that were generated
in the preceding phase (e.g., FRUIT-or_____, when “orange” was not
previously cued for the category FRUIT). The Control condition contains
members of categories that were not engaged at all during the Genera­
tion phase (e.g., INSTRUMENT-vi(olin) when no instruments were
invoked during the Generation phase). The retrieval-induced forgetting
effect is the finding that stem completion is typically less successful in the
Activated condition than in the Control condition. A Generated condi­
tion (containing items from the Generation phase) is often included as
well. This condition reliably shows greater retrieval success than the
others (e.g., Anderson et al., 1994; Anderson, 2003; Hulbert et al.,
2012). Note that throughout the paper we use transparent, vernacular
terms to facilitate broad understanding in place of the procedurespecific acronyms of the retrieval-induced forgetting literature.
Retrieval-induced forgetting (RIF) suggests that prior generation
impedes subsequent memory access to categorically related but not
generated items. We propose that the pattern of impaired access to
related material following generation reflects the same underlying
process as the semantic interference observed in language production
research. A variety of explanations have been proposed to account for
interference/forgetting in the memory literature. The early accounts of
Anderson and colleagues proposed that Activated items are inhibited
during the Generation phase making them less accessible than controls
at later testing, (Anderson et al., 1994; Anderson & Spellman, 1995).
The long-term mechanism of this inhibition was left underspecified.
Other accounts attribute retrieval-induced forgetting to a blocking
process in which previously generated items preclude access to ungen­
erated competitors from the same category (see Murayama et al., 2014
for an extensive review). According to blocking accounts, encountering
category cues used in the Generation phase during the final memory
assessment activates the Generation phase context, thereby promoting
access to previously Generated items at the expense of related Activated
items that are not linked to that context (Jonker et al., 2013; Jonker
et al., 2015). However, contrary to this account, RIF has been replicated
across a variety of tests specifically designed to limit the influence of
context, including variations in which new cue words without any
relation to the practiced category cues are used to elicit retrieval during
the final assessment phase (e.g., Anderson, 2003; Hulbert et al., 2012;
Hanczakowski & Mazzoni, 2013). We suggest that while context
certainly plays a role in some scenarios (see Norman et al., 2007; Mur­
ayama et al., 2014, for reviews), the blocking accounts do not explain
the full range of semantic interference findings.
One other account of retrieval induced forgetting, the computa­
tionally implemented adaptive learning account of Norman et al. (2007;
see also Norman et al., 2006), is of particular interest from the point of
view of rapprochement with the language production literature. This
account is partly a successor to the earlier Anderson et al. inhibition
account but implemented through specific neurally-inspired mecha­
nisms. The model contains episodic and semantic layers to model both
intraconceptual and contextually mediated learning. The semantic
aspect is composed of two layers, including fully connected “associa­
tive”/category and “item” layers, which enable the representation of the
category-item pairs used in RIF procedures. In the model, stem-cue
retrieval is implemented as pattern completion, and adaptive learning
processes act on the connectivity between microfeatures within con­
ceptual representations. When a particular memory representation is

Retrieval-induced forgetting in semantic memory
Retrieval-induced forgetting (RIF) is the phenomenon whereby
retrieval of material from memory leads to “forgetting,” or later retrieval
difficulty, for semantically related material (e.g., Anderson et al., 1994).
This definition makes the affinity with cumulative semantic interference
in language production evident, but also instigates a different framing.
The retrieval-induced forgetting literature disregards language pro­
cesses, effectively treating them as mere transducers of underlying
memory operations. Related to this disregard, the retrieval processes
that lead to forgetting are construed as generation but the how and what
of generation are largely left unspecified (e.g., Norman et al. 2007; Ritvo
et al., 2019). Moreover, the term forgetting itself may be a misnomer in
that it suggests a categorical process instead of the continuous modu­
lation of accessibility revealed in the language production literature.
These characteristics are exemplified in the standard tool of
retrieval-induced forgetting research, the retrieval practice paradigm
(Anderson et al., 1994). In this design, participants are familiarized with
an extensive list of category-exemplar pairs (e.g., FRUIT-apple…. IN­
STRUMENT-violin…. FRUIT-orange) with multiple exemplars in each of
several categories. In a subsequent Generation phase (usually referred to
as the retrieval practice phase in the memory literature), some items from
some of the familiarized categories are generated using category-stem
completion cues (e.g., FRUIT-ap____). Generation is repeated several

1
In the retrieval-induced forgetting literature, the corresponding terms are
Rp+ (retrieval practiced) for Generated, Rp- for Activated, and Nrp (no
retrieval practice) for the Control condition.

3

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

retrieved amidst coactivated competitors, an algorithm identifies weak
aspects of the target representation and overly active aspects of semantic
competitors by raising network-wide inhibition above and below a
predetermined threshold. A learning mechanism then strengthens the
connections of the weakly activated target features and weakens the
connections to overactive features within competing representations,
thereby making them more and less accessible, respectively, in future
use (Norman et al., 2007). Thus the incremental adjustment of access to
competing items matches the downregulation proposed by Oppenheim
et al. (2010) to occur in language production, albeit with a different
proposed locus and implementation.

aggregate retrieval success for both category-stem prompts (Experiment
1) and pictures (Experiment 2). Moreover, Brown (1981, Experiment 4)
was the first to implement the internal structuring of category members
within sequences that would later become the norm in continuous pic­
ture naming studies. Brown observed both longer latencies and higher
probability of retrieval failure over successive probes (ordinal positions)
within categories. Subsequent work by Brown et al. (1985) continued
this tradition of measuring both latencies and errors in word generation,
and again found robust evidence that interference accumulates over
semantically related word completions (see also Brown et al., 2005).
The Brown (1981) study was cited both in initial studies of retrievalinduced forgetting (e.g., Anderson et al., 1994) and in studies of inter­
ference in word production (e.g., Kroll & Stewart, 1994; Howard et al.,
2006). It is notable that, since then, retrieval-induced forgetting studies
have almost exclusively relied on aggregate retrieval success as a
dependent measure. In doing so, they have lost the ability to examine
how semantic interference unfolds within generative and memory
assessment phases of experiments, as well as the sensitivity of latency
measures to modulation of accessibility among retrievable items in
different conditions. On the other side, although they do routinely log
naming errors, including omissions, language production studies rarely
consider memory failures. One reason for this is that omissions and other
errors are infrequent in picture naming. In any case, unification of
memory and language production contributions may require a return to
Brown’s (1981) early diligence in using both latency and memory
measures.
Related to the previous issue, the two fields also use different ways of
eliciting generation, picture naming (language production) and
category-stem cueing (memory). We suggest that category-stem cued
retrieval and picture naming share the key generative process that is
implicated in semantic interference. Specifically, both require the same
two key stages of processing: retrieval from semantic memory and
retrieval and selection of a specific word. There are of course also dif­
ferences between the tasks. Picture naming procedures necessarily re­
cruit object recognition mechanisms within visual pathways (e.g., Jarret
et al., 2022), whereas category-stem cueing procedures entail overt
comprehension of category labels, constrained lexical search, and
arguably, rely more heavily on episodic memory processes to match the
stem to a specific familiarized exemplar (although such processes may
be partly implicit). Ironically, given that lexical processes are rarely
discussed, the category-stem cueing procedure may engage more lexical
processes than picture naming. In line with these differences, we note
that de Zubicaray et al. (2015) failed to find activation in brain areas
typically associated with the Generation phase of retrieval-induced
forgetting (i.e., hippocampus, right IFG, and ACC; see Kuhl et al.,
2007) during continuous picture naming, and they concluded from this
that the two phenomena are neurally distinct. However, we suggest that
the differences in brain signatures may be due to modality-specific
processes that are external to the necessarily shared processes engaged
during conceptual-lexical retrieval. We also note that the lack of acti­
vation in the ACC is inconsistent with other picture naming studies that
have found significant activity in the same regions (e.g., Indefrey &
Levelt, 2004; Gauvin et al. 2016; Llorens et al., 2016). Overall, we retain
our position that picture naming shares some key retrieval processes
with category-cued stem completion.
Another methodological impediment to integration is that the study
of cumulative semantic interference in language production has focused
on the unfolding impact on latencies within a single continuous
sequence, while retrieval-induced forgetting is studied using a multi­
phase design in which performance in the final phase reflects learning in
a prior phase. Each of these approaches has distinct benefits and limi­
tations. In continuous picture naming, the primary focus is on examining
how each retrieval instance dynamically impacts access to categorical
relatives later in the same sequence. The Generation phase in the
retrieval practice paradigm often follows a quite similar design to the
continuous naming task in that it requires iterative conceptual-lexical

Bridging the literatures
Thus far, we have argued that retrieval-induced forgetting and cu­
mulative semantic interference are both situated in an interconnected
conceptual-lexical network, that both may be attributed to adaptive
learning mechanisms in the network (e.g., Hughes & Schnur, 2016;
Oppenheim et al., 2010; Navarrete et al., 2010; Hulbert et al., 2012;
Norman et al., 2007), and that they may indeed be the same phenom­
enon (Navarrete et al., 2021; Jeye et al., 2021, but see de Zubicaray
et al., 2015). As noted above, other researchers have remarked on the
intersection of semantic interference in memory and language produc­
tion. As well as Oppenheim et al. (2010), Navarrete et al. (2010) made
direct connections between retrieval-induced forgetting and cumulative
semantic interference. However, these earlier discussions primarily
entailed juxtaposing findings in language production research to theo­
retical debates in the retrieval-induced forgetting literature. As dis­
cussed earlier, Oppenheim et al. (2010) related the roles of
strengthening versus downregulation to the “occlusion versus inhibi­
tion” debate in the RIF literature. Navarrete et al. (2010) suggested that
the lack of cumulative interference in word naming is in line with the
assumption of retrieval specificity proposed by Anderson et al (2000).
More recent work by Navarrete et al. (2021) also found that cumulative
interference did not depend on successful retrieval, which they noted
corresponds to similar findings in the RIF literature by Storm et al.
(2006).
Given these occasional discussions of parallels between the fields,
why has there been so little integration of the fields or direct comparison
of findings across them? Contributing factors may include the use of
different dependent measures and very different experimental designs
and procedures. Moreover, as discussed, each literature proposes a
different locus of interference, and there is a differential consideration of
episodic versus semantic memory processes. We now address each of
these issues in turn.
Methodological considerations
First, underlying commonalities may be masked by the different
research practices of memory and language production researchers.
Language production researchers are thoroughly entrenched in picturenaming procedures, whereas the RIF literature is dominated by the
valuable but restrictive retrieval practice paradigm, even to the point of
adopting domain-specific labels that may impede connective thinking.
Here, we emphasize that just because a task is used to study one
particular type of processing, this does not mean that other processes are
not engaged. For example, category-stem cueing is not simply a
“memory task,” but a task that actually involves both semantic retrieval
and word production. The most important element may be that the
different framings of each literature have led to the use of different
dependent measures, specifically the exclusive use of continuous latency
measures in language studies and of aggregate retrieval success mea­
sures in memory experiments.
Indeed it appears that the siloing of these practices occurred despite
early evidence of their common ground. A seminal study of semantic
interference by Brown et al. (1981) measured both latency and
4

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

retrieval of interspersed category members within a single sequence.
However, critical elements of this presentation method are never
considered, including the role of lags between related items in pro­
moting long-term interference rather than short-term facilitation
(Navarrete et al., 2014). Given that adaptive learning accounts (see prior
discussion) assume that downregulation of competitors occurs during
the Generation phase, it is puzzling that the field has focused on
measuring the retrieval of related items in the final assessment phase,
rather than also investigating the internal dynamics of the Generation
phase itself (see Brown, 1981; Brown et al., 1985; and Kuhl et al., 2007,
for exceptions). The present work addresses this crucial weakness in the
memory research.
At the same time, our research addresses a significant weakness of
language production studies, the lack of a true baseline, by adopting a
retrieval-induced forgetting design. The final phase of this design assesses
the effect of retrieving related category members in the prior generation
phase by comparing retrieval of additional members of the categories to
a true baseline (control) condition. Because continuous picture naming
does not have such a baseline measure, there is some ambiguity as to
whether progressive slowing of latencies is exclusively due to semantic
interference. The assessment of memory after a retention interval in the
retrieval practice paradigm necessitated comparison to a baseline con­
trol condition and we adopt that design feature here. Thus, the practices
in each field have benefits and limitations, and combining them provides
the opportunity to adopt the best features of both.

of interference in the language production literature may indicate that
most existing RIF findings can be accounted for by semantic memory
processes alone. In any case, we do not focus on the semantic-episodic
distinction in the current work, a position that is in line with modern
critiques of over-segregated conceptualizations of episodic and semantic
memory (Yee et al., 2018; see also McRae et al., 2021).
In sum, the bridging of these literatures and their perspectives is both
desirable and feasible. We suggest that aligning both the theoretical
claims and empirical evidence in the cumulative interference and
retrieval-induced forgetting literatures will deepen understanding of
retrieval-based adaptations and clarify the division of labor between
processes in conceptual memory substrates and in lexical pathways. In
the current study, we seek to combine the strengths of both language
production and memory perspectives in order to overcome their
respective weaknesses, thereby paving the way for future integrative
work.
Experiment: Cumulative semantic interference in a retrieval-induced
forgetting design
In light of these considerations, we designed an experiment that
brings the memory and language production literatures into dialogue.
Although there are many ways in which integration of the two litera­
tures could be implemented, in this initial investigation we sought to
make the case that cumulative interference and retrieval-induced
forgetting (RIF) entail the same or similar learning mechanisms acting
on the same conceptual-lexical representations. We did not seek to
identify the specific mechanisms that drive interference. Rather, this
initial proof-of concept exploration leaves open a range of possibilities
for future integrative accounts. In service of this aim, we measured la­
tencies in a structured retrieval practice design to investigate if the cu­
mulative interference that is typically found in the language production
literature occurs similarly in a category-stem cue Generation procedure.
Critically, we also assessed if this generative activity impaired later
accessibility of related picture names relative to controls, implementing
a retrieval-induced forgetting design in a continuous picture naming
procedure.
The experiment reported below follows the four-part structure of a
standard retrieval-induced forgetting experiment. The design entailed
an initial familiarization procedure (standard in both literatures), a
Generation Phase using category-cued stem-completion, a filled reten­
tion interval, and a Final Assessment Phase using continuous picture
naming. In the initial familiarization procedure, participants were pre­
sented with each picture paired with its category and name, which both
aids in instantiating the specific category-target combination for the
Generation Phase and reduces errors associated with “exuberant
responding” in the later Picture Naming Phase (Ferreira et al., 2008). In
the Generation Phase, fidelity was maintained to the repeated categorystem completion procedure of the retrieval-induced forgetting litera­
ture. However, an internal quartile structure was implemented in which
related items were distributed evenly across the sequences. This is a
much more controlled presentation than typically used in RIF studies. By
measuring both generation latencies and errors, we sought to demon­
strate that cumulative semantic interference occurs in the same way
whether generation is elicited by category-stem prompts or by pictures.
The prompts were presented in three passes to ensure adequate expo­
sure, although past work has suggested that adaptive learning processes
may primarily occur in the first pass (Kuhl et al., 2007).
An earlier study with a similar design used single letter cues (i.e.,
INSECTS – b___) in the generation phase, but retrieval success was lower
than desirable (see Hambric & O’Séaghdha, 2022). The current experi­
ment therefore used two-letter stem cues. The Generation Phase was
followed by a 15-minute retention interval in which participants
completed a medium-level sudoku puzzle. Participants then completed
the Final Assessment Phase, which followed the typical design of a
continuous picture naming task with name generation latencies as the

Assumed locus of interference
A key issue that separates the literatures is the presumed location of
interference in long-term semantic memory representations versus in
conceptual-lexical links. This issue is complex and there is not full
agreement on the question of locus in either literature. We have argued
above that, in both literatures, adaptive learning accounts can best
explain the existing findings. Therefore, we suggest that the issue of
locus can be provisionally reduced to the contrasting assumptions of the
two influential computational models of Norman et al (2007) and
Oppenheim et al (2010). A more detailed consideration of these two
models illuminates both the possible benefits and challenges of bringing
them into correspondence. In Norman et al. (2007), adaptations are
proposed to operate on intra-conceptual configurations of features,
whereas in the model proposed by Oppenheim et al. (2010), adaptations
modulate the strength of conceptual-lexical links. Since memory and
lexical retrieval are inherently intertwined in current generative tasks, it
is impossible to discern which process drives interference. For example,
one could argue that the Norman et al. (2007) model implicitly in­
corporates lexico-conceptual representations in the hidden layers that
bind collections of semantic features. Therefore, bindings between these
wholistic representations and features could potentially be altered by
generative activity. Likewise, the Oppenheim et al. (2010) model could
be modified to allow dynamic changes in conceptual ensembles as well
as changes in conceptual-lexical bindings. Pending new evidence on this
matter, semantic interference may be attributable to intra-conceptual
change, to change in conceptual-lexical connections, or some combi­
nation of both.
Lastly, whereas semantic interference in language production is
studied as a semantic phenomenon, retrieval-induced forgetting ac­
counts often include episodic memory processes. This issue is exempli­
fied by the previously discussed contextual blocking accounts, which
have posited that “forgetting” results from using cues that are episodi­
cally bound to the Generation phase context (e.g., Jonker et al., 2012).
In addition, work by Ciranni & Shimamura (1999) suggests that episodic
relatedness is sufficient to elicit interference. However, other work
contradicts this conclusion. New cues without any intrinsic relatedness
to the target (i.e., purely episodic cues) do not produce interference (e.
g., Perfect et al., 2004). Moreover, we suggest (in line with the inte­
gration efforts of the present work) that the success of semantic accounts
5

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

primary dependent measure. In this phase, we only included the critical
Activated and Control conditions. This was partly because the positive
effect of prior generation is uncontroversial and highly reliable. More
importantly, given that cumulative interference unfolds across en­
counters with categorically related items, and that Generated and
Activated items are drawn from the same categories, we chose to
implement a balanced design comprising only the never-generated
Activated and Control conditions. This mitigates the possibility of
contamination of the Activated condition by previously generated items
and thus provides a clean test of the influence of past related generative
activity.
The predictions were as follows. In the Generation Phase, we pre­
dicted the cumulative interference typically found in language produc­
tion studies, which manifests as an increase in generation latencies over
Ordinal Positions. In the Final Assessment Phase, we also expected
typical cumulative interference in both the Activated the Control con­
ditions. Critically, we predicted that, on aggregate, it would take longer
to retrieve and produce picture names in the Activated condition relative
to the Control condition. This Memory Condition effect would replicate
the pattern of hindered access to items related to previously generated
items that constitutes the retrieval-induced forgetting effect, but here
manifested primarily as increased generation latencies rather than only
as decreased retrieval rates. We did not predict a particular pattern of
interaction between Memory Condition and Ordinal Position, that is,
between new and old interference, but the design can capture any such
interaction.

Psychology Software Tools 200A SR box interfaced to an ATR20 AudioTechnica microphone, situated approximatelty12 inches away from the
participant, and audio for the entire session was recorded using a SONY
ICD-PX720 recorder.
Design
The experiment comprised four sub-procedures, including an initial
familiarization procedure, a Generation Phase, a filler task, and a final
Picture Naming Phase. The two critical phases comprised two distinct
but linked designs (see below). Assignment of categories between the
Generation Phase and the Control condition was balanced across two
experiment versions, and assignment of items to Generated vs. ungen­
erated (Activated) status within each version was further counter­
balanced over two sub-versions. To equate the number of items in the
Activated and Control conditions, only half of the items in the Control
condition were presented, and the half presented was counterbalanced
in the sub-versions.
Generation phase
This phase comprised the “retrieval practice” phase typically
implemented in retrieval-induced forgetting experiments (e.g., Ander­
son et al., 1994). Participants underwent category-stem completion
retrieval for half (4) of the items from half (5) of the categories. One item
from each category was presented in each of four quartiles, thus
distributing related items evenly. There was a minimum lag of 1, a
maximum lag of 8, and an average lag of 4.5 unrelated items between
members of the same category. The order of quartiles was balanced
across participants via a Latin Square, and items were randomly pre­
sented within quartiles. Following standard practice, this sequence was
repeated three times, each Repetition implementing a new ordering of
quartiles and items and with no immediate repetition of quartiles across
Repetitions. Filler items were presented only once, before the first
Repetition and at the end of the third. In this phase, the key variables
were the within-subject factors Ordinal Position (1–4) and Repetition
(1–3).

Method
Participants and power considerations
The cross-paradigm nature of the present study made estimation of
predicted effect size and required power difficult. Rather than con­
ducting a power analysis, we estimated the appropriate power using the
guidelines proposed by Brysbaert & Stevens (2018). According to their
recommendations, a reaction time experiment with repeated measures
should have a minimum of 1,600 observations per condition. Given that
there were 20 target trials in each condition of the critical picture
naming phase, 96 participants were recruited from Lehigh University in
return for either $8 US (N=13) or class credit (N=83) in an introductory
psychology course, resulting in up to 1920 measures per condition.

Continuous picture naming phase
In this phase, pictures corresponding to items in the Activated and
Control conditions (see above) were presented in a continuous stream.
Prior to the experimental trials, 10 unrelated filler pictures were pre­
sented to reduce data loss associated with task orientation. As in the
Generation phase, one item from each Activated and Control category
was randomly assigned to each quartile. The order of presentation
within each quartile was randomized, and the order of quartiles was
counterbalanced across experiment versions. Because immediate repe­
titions from the same category were not allowed, there was a minimum
lag of 1 and a maximum lag of 18 between members of the same cate­
gory, with an average of 9.5. Thus, there were two within-subject fac­
tors: Memory Condition (Activated versus Control) and Ordinal Position
(1–4).

Materials and apparatus
Ten groups of eight taxonomically related items (80) were selected
from the Bank of Standardized Stimuli (Brodeur et al., 2010; Brodeur
et al., 2014). In addition, five unrelated fillers were presented at the
beginning and end of the Generation phase (see Design) to mitigate
primacy and recency effects. Ten additional fillers were presented as
task practice at the beginning of the continuous Picture Naming Phase to
reduce data loss on experimental trials. The relatedness of items in each
taxonomic group was established using normative data from the Bank of
Standardized Stimuli (Brodeur et al., 2010; Brodeur et al., 2014) and
additional frequency data were acquired from the LexOPS data base to
ensure selected items were as equivalent as possible (Taylor et al.,
2020). Both average name agreement (87 %) and average category
agreement (94 %) were high and always exceeded 60 %. The complete
list of materials and selection criteria can be found on OSF (https://doi.
org/10.17605/OSF.IO/UASFM). Pictures were presented centrally and
sized to approximately 4 in x 4 in (Brodeur et al., 2014). Text was pre­
sented in 14-point Corsolas font. The filler task was a printed medium
level sudoku puzzle.
The experiment was programmed using E-Prime 3.0 and was con­
ducted using a Dell OptiPlex 7020 computer with a 1908FPt 75 DPI
monitor with a refresh rate of 80 Hz. Participants were seated approx­
imately 16 in. from the screen. Voice onset times were recorded using a

Procedure
The experiment comprised four separate procedures (see Fig. 1).
Familiarization
Following standard practice in both the memory and language pro­
duction literatures, participants were first introduced to the materials.
They were told that they would be naming a series of everyday objects
and that they would be using the information in subsequent tasks. All
items used in later phases, including fillers, were presented as pictures
with their category and name in a randomized sequence. Presenting the
names with the pictures eliminates the need for active lexical retrieval
but makes the designated names (as well as the category-name combi­
nations) available for the experimental phases. Thus, both the category6

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

Fig. 1. Schematic of the four-part experimental procedure.

exemplar pairs and corresponding pictures were introduced in a single
pass.
On each trial, a fixation cross appeared for 200 ms, followed by the
presentation of a picture with the category-name combination (e.g.,
INSTRUMENTS – violin) below it for 1500 ms. To ensure that the in­
formation was registered, participants read each category and picture
name aloud. The experimenter provided feedback on standard pronun­
ciation on the few occasions where it was necessary. No data were
collected.

previous one. Following the completion of this phase, participants were
thanked and received an educational debriefing.
Results
Audio recordings of each session were coded off-line by the first
author and trained research assistants. Trials in which an environmental
sound set off the voice key and trials in which the reaction time was less
than 250 ms were coded as invalid and excluded from all analyses. In
both the Generation and Continuous Picture Naming phases, trials in
which a participant used an incorrect or incomplete name, responded
dysfluently, or did not respond, were coded as salient naming errors and
excluded from latency analyses. Both latencies and salient errors were
analyzed.
Separate linear mixed model analyses were conducted in R version
4.0.3 using the afex package (Singmann & Kellen, 2019) for the Gen­
eration and Picture Naming Phases. Sum-zero contrasts were set for the
relevant categorical variables and F-tests for the fixed effects were
conducted with Satterthwaite approximations applied to estimate the
degrees of freedom. There was no meaningful effect of the counter­
balancing factor and it was therefore excluded from analyses.

Generation Phase: Category-stem cues
In this phase, participants were instructed (with examples) that they
would be presented with category-stem cues for some of the familiarized
items on each trial and that they should try to retrieve the word
matching the cue as quickly and accurately as possible. They were told
that each category-stem cue would appear multiple times and that they
were to remain silent if they did not recall the word. The stems were
always the first two letters of the target name. Each category-stem cue
was assigned to a quartile in a continuous sequence, and the whole
sequence (with new randomization) was repeated three times (see
Generation Phase Design). Five fillers were presented at the beginning
and at the end of the phase to alleviate possible primacy and recency
effects. On each trial, a fixation cross appeared for 200 ms, followed by
the category name and the two-letter stem of the target (e.g., IN­
STRUMENTS – vi____). The display lasted for 8 s or until a naming
response was registered. In order to encourage effortful retrieval across
repetitions, no feedback was provided during the Generation phase. The
next trial began 1000 ms after the conclusion of the previous one.

Generation phase
Latency analysis
Descriptively, generation time decreased across Repetitions (MeanR1
= 1441, SE=38; MeanR2 = 1242, SE=38; MeanR3 = 1110, SE=38). More
importantly, a 182 ms increase in generation time across ordinal posi­
tions was observed in the first Repetition. There was little effect of
Ordinal Position in subsequent Repetitions (see Fig. 2).
The maximally converging linear mixed model for latencies included
the fixed main effects of Ordinal Position, Repetition, and their inter­
action, as well as random intercepts for both subjects and items. There
was a main effect of Repetition, in which generation times decreased
more than 300 ms over Repetitions, F (2,3988) = 113.20, p < .001. The
main effect of Ordinal Position was also significant (F (3,3997) = 4.51, p
= .004): Generation times increased with each newly retrieved category
member. The effect of Ordinal Position was qualified by a significant
interaction between Repetition and Ordinal Position (F (6,4024) = 6.50,
p < .001), which reflects the concentration of cumulative interference in
the first Repetition (see Fig. 2). This is in contrast to some past research,
such as that by Navarrete et al. (2010), who found that cumulative
interference in picture naming was stable even when the entire sequence
was repeated four times (see also Costa et al., 2009). A possible inter­
pretation is that category stem-cueing is strongly generative only until
the solution is found. Overall, these data indicate that cumulative
interference arises in category-stem completion in the same way as in
previous picture naming studies, but that it may not accumulate further

Filler task
Participants worked on a printed medium difficulty level sudoku
puzzle for 15 min. They were instructed to try to complete the puzzle to
the best of their ability, but that there would be no formal assessment of
their sudoku performance. The attention-demanding, numerically ori­
ented sudoku task was selected to prevent participants from engaging
with/rehearsing experimental materials during the interval.
Assessment Phase: Continuous picture naming
Participants named the target pictures in one continuous sequence
internally segmented into quartiles (see Design). Ten unrelated filler
pictures preceded the experimental trials. On each trial, a fixation cross
was presented for 200 ms followed by the printed category (e.g., IN­
STRUMENTS) of the upcoming picture for 750 ms. Category labels are
not usual in picture naming procedures but were used here for consis­
tency with the Generation phase. The target picture (without label) was
then presented for up to 1500 ms or until a naming response was
registered. A tone sounded and a “too slow” message appeared for 200
ms if the time limit was exceeded. Another trial began 1000 ms after the
7

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

The error analysis included salient naming errors as explained
earlier. A logistic linear mixed model analysis was conducted on the
error data. Due to error sparsity, the maximal model included only the
fixed effect of Repetition and random intercepts for participants and
items. We were not able to statistically assess the effect of Ordinal Po­
sition. There was a main effect of Repetition (χ 2 = 15.62, p = .001) such
that errors decreased across Repetitions. This reflects that participants
occasionally generated items in later repetitions that were not retrieved
previously. Thus, although adaptive learning processes may primarily
operate in the first Repetition, subsequent repetitions may still be
somewhat useful in eliciting additional retrievals.
Continuous picture naming phase
Latency analysis
As predicted, picture naming time in the Activated condition (Mean
= 792, SE=13) was longer than in the Control condition (Mean = 769,
SE=13), a retrieval-induced semantic interference effect. Naming times
also increased over the first three Ordinal Positions (see Fig. 3), showing
new interference within the Picture Naming phase and convergence of
latencies in the two conditions over Ordinal Positions.
The maximal linear model included fixed main effects of Memory
Condition and Ordinal Position as well as their interaction, and random
intercepts for both subjects and items. The 23 ms main effect of Memory
Condition, F (1,3011) = 9.66, p = .002, a retrieval-induced semantic
interference effect, was significant. The increased interference over
quartiles was also significant (F (3,3014) = 15.88, p < .001), indicating
new cumulative interference over Ordinal Positions in both conditions.
In addition, the interaction between Memory Condition and Ordinal
Positions was marginally significant (F (3,3009) = 2.56, p = .053),
suggesting that the steeper accrual of interference in the control con­
dition is meaningful. Planned comparisons show that the effect of
Memory Condition was significant only in the first (z = 3.23, p < .001)
and second (z = 2.31, p = .02) Ordinal Positions. Latencies converged in
the third and fourth Ordinal Positions. In contrast to the Generation
phase, latencies in both conditions even decreased slightly in the fourth
position. A follow up comparison indicated that the difference between
the third and fourth positions was not significant, z = 1.21, p > .05. The
important implication of these findings is that retrieval-induced inter­
ference from the Generation Phase may be stronger at the beginning of

Fig. 2. Cumulative interference in production time for targets in the Genera­
tion phase. Subsequent Generations are aggregated over second and third
repetitions.

in repeated passes through materials.
Error analysis
The total error rate in this phase was 19 %, which is slightly lower
than the retrieval failure rate found in the RIF literature. Descriptively,
retrieval errors decreased only slightly with Repetitions (Mean R1 = 22
%, Mean R2 = 19 %, Mean R3 = 17 %). In the first Repetition, the error
rate slightly increased across Ordinal Positions, Mean Q1 = 20 %, Mean
Q2 = 22 %, Mean Q3 = 20 %, Mean Q4 = 25 %. Extraneous/equipment
based errors comprised 1.7 % of total trials and 9 % of total errors.
Naming errors comprised 91 % of all errors, and of these errors, 249
were commission errors, such as semantic substitutions (e.g., “ha
(ndkerchief)” for “ha(t)”) while 964 were omissions in which the
participant failed to give any response at all within the eight second
response window. These omission errors most closely correspond to the
retrieval failures reported in the RIF literature. It is notable that, both
here and in the RIF literature more generally, retrieval failures are
substantial despite the familiarization procedure.

Fig. 3. Picture naming time as a function of Memory Condition. A) Significantly greater picture naming RTs for previously Activated categories relative to unac­
tivated Controls. B) Cumulative interference in experimental and control conditions converges over Ordinal Positions.
8

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

the assessment phase and may even be completely absent as interference
accrues more strongly in the control condition.

picture naming does persist over repeated passes through the materials.
In the final picture naming phase, it took longer to name pictures
corresponding to new items from previously used categories relative to
controls. That is, the findings showed a retrieval-induced forgetting
(RIF) pattern in picture naming latencies despite the change of format
between the Generation and Assessment phases. The use of full coun­
terbalancing between conditions, and over ordinal positions within
them, bolsters this finding. The effect survived a 15 min retention in­
terval, providing important evidence for the temporal durability pro­
posed in both memory and language accounts that incorporate
incremental learning (Norman et al., 2007; Oppenheim et al., 2010).
This is solid evidence of long-term semantic interference relative to a
true baseline – which we have noted is absent in most language pro­
duction studies of semantic interference in continuous picture naming.
In addition to the interference carried over from the Generation phase,
additional interference accrued over ordinal positions in both the Acti­
vated and Control conditions of this phase, with a somewhat steeper
accumulation observed in the Control condition. Planned comparisons
showed that the difference between the conditions was significant only
in the first half of the picture naming phase. Although this finding was
not predicted, it underlines the value of examining cumulative inter­
ference rather than only using aggregate measures of successful
retrieval. Additional within-task experimentation is needed to establish
whether the long-term effect of retrieval-induced semantic interference
is reliably stronger earlier than later in a sequence of retrievals.
The durability of semantic interference across tasks in the experi­
ment provides novel evidence for cue-independence, a central tenet of
long-term adaptation accounts of retrieval-induced forgetting (e.g.,
Anderson, 2003; Hulbert et al., 2012; Camp et al., 2007; Perfect et al.,
2004). The cue-independence assumption states that retrieval-induced
forgetting is independent of the particular cues used to elicit retrieval
and so involves change within semantic memory (Anderson, 2003). The
assumption has been tested by using different retrieval cues during
initial and later retrievals (e.g., Hulbert et al., 2012). However, finding
truly independent cues can be difficult, and even when this problem is
solved participants may nevertheless use the originally assigned cate­
gories covertly (covert cueing hypothesis, see Jonker et al., 2012). In the
present study, we used pictures as independent cues in the Assessment
phase, and still observed a retrieval-induced forgetting effect in the
picture naming latencies, supporting cue independence.

Error analysis
The overall error rate in this phase was 12 %. Extraneous/equipment
based errors comprised 1.6 % of total trials and 14 % of total errors.
Naming errors comprised 86 % of all errors, and of these errors, 205
were commission errors, and 262 were omission errors. The number of
errors was similar across Memory Conditions, Activated = 159, Control
= 150. As in the Generation phase, a logistic linear mixed model analysis
was conducted on the target naming errors. The final model included the
fixed factors of Memory Condition and Ordinal Position, their interac­
tion, and random intercepts for subjects and items. The effects of
Memory Condition (χ 2 = 0.66, p > .05), Ordinal Position (χ 2 = 2.00, p >
.05), and their interaction (χ 2 = 3.39, p > .05) were not significant. Thus,
whereas there was a RIF pattern in naming latencies, there were no ef­
fects in errors. Picture naming errors in this study may thus be mostly
due to considerations other than semantic interference.
Discussion
This research is part of a larger effort to bring independent but
parallel language and memory accounts of retrieval-based long-term
semantic interference into alignment. Separate cumulative semantic
interference (language production) and retrieval-induced forgetting
(memory) literatures both investigate decrements in later accessibility
of activated but unselected concepts or words. Influential accounts
within each literature propose that adaptive incremental learning pro­
cesses are at the root of these decrements (Oppenheim et al., 2010;
Howard et al., 2006; Norman et al., 2007), but synthesis of these com­
plementary perspectives has yet to occur. The review of the respective
literatures highlighted the strengths and limitations of current memory
and language production approaches to semantic interference, and the
experiment illustrated the value of an integrative approach. The findings
showed lasting semantic interference in a continuous picture naming
procedure following earlier related generative activity. The ways that
semantic interference accrued over time within both stem-completion
(Generation) and picture naming (Assessment) phases provided addi­
tional insights. We conclude that there is no difference in the underlying
basis of retrieval-induced forgetting and cumulative semantic interference,
and therefore propose that the literatures be integrated under the rubric
retrieval-induced semantic interference.

Extensions of present study

Key findings

The study presented here used one particular design that combined
elements of memory and language production methodologies, but of
course many other variations are possible. First, in the present study we
implemented the standard repeated category-stem cueing procedure
during the Generation phase and used picture naming in the Assessment
phase. While the switch from category-stem cue to picture naming
highlights the robustness of semantic interference, it would be inter­
esting to see if a similar pattern of results would be obtained if the tasks
were flipped, such that the Generation phase entailed picture naming
and the Assessment comprised category-stem cued retrieval. This would
make it possible to assess memory measures as well as continuous
retrieval latencies, providing more direct comparison to findings in the
retrieval-induced forgetting literature. In other variations, both phases
could use category-cued stem completion, as is done in the RIF literature
(sometimes with minor changes in the cues between phases), or both
phases could use picture naming. Each of these variations could provide
additional insights.
Second, our findings call into question the value of repetitions in the
Generation phase of the standard retrieval practice paradigm. Repeated
production of category-stem cued targets is typical in the retrieval
practice paradigm, but the present results suggest that adaptive learning
processes are concentrated in the first generation of the items. Thus, the
repetitions may merely serve as additional opportunities to retrieve

We now consider key findings in more detail. The experiment
adopted a retrieval practice design from the retrieval-induced forgetting
literature but employed latency measures to provide continuous
assessment of semantic interference in both the Generation (categorycued stem completion) and Assessment (picture naming) phases of the
experiment. The design provided a rigorous test of long-term interfer­
ence relative to baseline and, by changing tasks between the crucial
phases, showed that interference is a general process. The Generation
phase, harking back to pioneering work of Brown (1981), measured
latencies as well as errors in a structured category-cued stem completion
task. The presentation sequence was structured such that one member of
each category occurred in each of four quartiles. We observed cumula­
tive interference in latencies only in the first of three reshuffled pre­
sentations of the sequence. Analysis of this phase thus provides insight
into the emergence of interference in a typical memory research pro­
cedure and suggests, in agreement with Kuhl et al., (2007), that the
standard practice of eliciting generation multiple times may have
limited value when the generation phase uses category-stem comple­
tion. As noted earlier, this conclusion is task specific. Navarrete et al.,
(2010) showed that cumulative interference is robust over repetitions of
picture naming sequences, so it appears that cumulative interference in
9

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

items that were not retrieved in the initial pass. However, even this may
have limited influence on semantic interference, given that work in both
RIF and in language production has found that successful retrieval is not
required to induce later interference (Storm et al., 2006; Navarrete et al.,
2021). That is, downregulation of coactivated items may occur even if
the target is not generated. On the other hand, semantic interference
does persist through repeated passes of picture naming sequences
(Navarrete et al., 2010), so quantifying how much repetition influences
semantic interference in experimental variations with picture naming in
the generation phase should be a priority. Varying the repetitions is easy
to implement and will help inform under what conditions adaptive
learning operates in both category-stem cued generation and picture
naming.
Lastly, we chose not to repeat items from the Generation phase in the
Assessment phase for reasons discussed earlier. It would be valuable to
assess whether including a Generated condition affects the Activated
condition, and especially the accumulation of interference over Ordinal
Positions. Specifically, we reasoned that naming previously generated
and strengthened items intermittently within the sequence could disrupt
the linear accumulation of interference in the Activated condition. While
this is at odds with the finding that repeating a single item did not
disrupt the overall linear trajectory of cumulative interference in
Oppenheim et al.’s (2010) Simulation 2, whether the same is true for an
equal number of repeated and ungenerated items is far less certain and
warrants further investigation. In sum, it would be useful to know
whether inclusion of the Generated condition affects the strength of
retrieval induced semantic interference, how this plays out over time,
and how much the Generated condition itself shows new interference in
a later phase.

generation failures are termed omission errors, and other types of errors
that entail dysfluent or inaccurate responses are termed commission
errors. Such a nuanced approach to the analysis of errors might likewise
provide added insight in studies of memory retrieval.
Theoretical considerations
Integration across literatures must happen at a theoretical level in
addition to incorporating useful aspects of respective methodologies. In
addition to the issue of cue independence discussed earlier, several other
theoretical assumptions formalized by Anderson and colleagues may be
fruitful areas of theoretical alignment and testing. The assumption of
retrieval specificity states that explicit retrieval (rather than mere expo­
sure) is necessary for semantic interference. This is evidenced by the
absence of interference when activated items are presented (but not
generated) prior to the assessment phase (e.g., Ciranni & Shimamura,
1999; see Murayama et al., 2014 for review). The same assumption is
made throughout the language production literature (e.g., Navarrete
et al., 2010; Belke, 2013) and is presumed by Oppenheim et al. (2010).
Forthcoming work in our own lab confirms that cumulative interference
is not found when reading semantically related words aloud rather than
generating the names from pictures (O’Séaghdha et al., in prep). Further
work is needed to more fully understand retrieval specificity, and the
generality of retrieval-induced interference across different retrieval
tasks.
The assumption of interference dependence states that the degree of
observed forgetting is dependent on the degree of interference during
the Generation phase (Anderson, 2003). Evidence concerning the factors
that determine the degree of interference in language production is
mixed. For example, Rose et al. (2019) found cumulative interference
for related items with high feature overlap (e.g., chimpanzee, orangutan)
but not for those sharing only a broad category membership (orangutan,
donkey). In addition, Oppenheim (2018) found that newly acquired
category members elicited the same degree of interference as those
already incorporated in the lexicon. However, Rose et al. (2017)
observed cumulative interference for thematic relations without any
feature overlap (e.g., pacifier and baby), suggesting that feature overlap
cannot be the whole story. More research is needed to reconcile these
findings.
Lastly, the assumption of temporal insensitivity explicitly proposed by
Oppenheim et al. (2010) and implicitly assumed by Anderson et al. and
Norman et al. (2007) is severely under-researched. According to
Oppenheim et al. (2010), cumulative semantic interference is insensitive
to time, such that it only dissipates with relevant production experience.
The current evidence for this assumption is also mixed. While some work
suggests that interference does dissipate across extensive lags of unre­
lated items (Schnur, 2014), the present study showed that interference
persisted across a 15-minute retention interval. The longevity of se­
mantic interference in memory has also been subject to debate with
mixed results, with some work suggesting that forgetting vanishes after
24-hours (MacLeod & McRae, 2001), but other studies showing effects
even after a one-week delay (Storm et al., 2012; Tandoh & Naja, 2007).
Clearly, there is a strong overlap of theoretical interests across litera­
tures, and we expect that these specific issues and others would be better
addressed in a unified framework.

Methodological considerations
We highlight four concrete methodological recommendations based
on lessons learned from the present study. First, impaired access to
Activated items relative to Control was observed in latency data. How­
ever, this RIF effect was evident only in the first half of the assessment
phase. Thus, latencies revealed changes in relative accessibility that the
aggregate retrieval measures that are typically reported in the memory
literature do not. Therefore, we strongly recommend the use of latency
measures in the assessment of semantic interference.
Second, we recommend that future work in retrieval-induced
forgetting use latencies to assess the interference in the Generation as
well as the Assessment phases of the retrieval practice paradigm. Spe­
cifically, as noted above, investigation into the internal dynamics of the
Generation phase can help reveal how adaptive learning unfolds over
time, and under what conditions.
Third, the design of the retrieval practice paradigm provides a
baseline for assessing sustained interference that has been lacking in the
language production literature. The lack of a true baseline is a weakness
of the continuous picture naming paradigm, and implementation of a
multiphase design such as we used here addresses this issue. Future
cumulative interference studies should incorporate baselines. That said,
the baseline we have adopted from the retrieval induced forgetting
literature may itself have limitations. Convergence of latencies in Acti­
vated and Control conditions does not appear to indicate that interfer­
ence from the generation phase is reduced over time (see Fig. 3). Instead,
it could indicate that the validity of the baseline is reduced as it incurs
strong within-phase interference.
Fourth, the present work differentiated between error types in both
the Generation and Picture Naming phases. In the memory literature,
errors are viewed as the converse of successful retrieval, and they are
generally not analyzed further. Moreover, some responses that may be
recorded as erroneous in the language production literature, such as
disfluent responses, are not counted as errors in the memory literature.
The language production literature has a long history of using the type of
error to further elucidate underlying processes. For example, complete

A unified conceptual-lexical approach
The initial integrative work reported here provides clear evidence of
common ground between memory and language production approaches
to semantic interference, but also leaves questions regarding the locus of
semantic interference. The present research does not address where
exactly along the conceptual-lexical interface semantic interference
originates. As discussed previously, Norman et al. (2007) and Oppen­
heim et al. (2010) propose different loci of semantic interference. Spe­
cifically, Norman et al. (2007) assume that forgetting is ultimately
10

C.E. Hambric and P.G. O’Séaghdha

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104570

traceable to changes to the connectivity of features within conceptual
representations. However, this account neglects the potential role of the
linguistic processes engaged in most recall tasks and conflates memory
storage and access into a single layer. In contrast, the model of Oppen­
heim et al. (2010) adopts an opposite bias by ascribing semantic inter­
ference entirely to changes in the links between concepts and abstract
words (lemmas). Like other language production accounts, Oppenheim
et al. do not consider the possibility of dynamic changes in conceptual
representations themselves, though it is uncontroversial to assume that
adaptive learning process also occur in the conceptual stratum (e.g.,
Lambon-Ralph et al., 2017; Rodd et al. 2004; Oppenheim & Nozari,
2024). Theoretically, we see no basis for assuming either conflation. We
suggest that this logic may, in principle, be extended to any phenome­
non that requires both conceptual and lexical retrieval. For example, the
tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon studied in production is often attributed
to impoverished links between the relevant semantic features and the
target lexical representation (e.g., Meyer & Bock, 1992; Gollan & Brown,
2006). However, if conceptual level adaptive learning processes also
affect lexical accessibility, this effect could plausibly be explained by
weakened connections among the conceptual features themselves.
Overall, we do not yet know how much of interference in linguistically
mediated generation occurs in the conceptual (semantic memory) stra­
tum versus in mappings between concepts and lexical representations.
The final and most critical recommendation of this article is the
development of a computational model that includes dynamically
adjustable conceptual feature configurations (Norman et al., 2007) as
well as links between the conceptual stratum and lexical units (as in
Oppenheim et al., 2010). The successes of both types of models suggest
that they capture important semantic interference processes, but we
simply do not know what the division of labor is between intraconceptual and conceptual-lexical processes, or how this may vary
with different tasks and procedures. An elaborated model, in conjunc­
tion with directed empirical investigation, should serve as a primary
goal of future work.

Acknowledgments
We thank Emily Wegrzyn, Cindy Tran, and Diane Marrow for their
invaluable help with data collection and coding.
