Introduction
In spoken language, after a speaker has chosen the words they want
to say and how those words should be combined, they must convert
those words into sequences of sounds so that a listener can receive the
message. The process of selecting the appropriate sounds and arranging
them in the appropriate order is called “phonological encoding.” Models
of phonological encoding in language production typically agree that
speakers access phonological content via the lexical representations of
the planned message; however, many details about this selection process
remain unknown, and studies suggest that the process is unlikely to be as
simple as it may first appear. For example, numerous studies have shown
that the phonological content of English speakers’ recent productions
can affect the duration of subsequent words if they share sounds. When
words are repeated from a recent utterance, the second iterations often
have reduced durations (e.g., Fowler & Housum, 1987; Lam & Watson,
2010; Buxó-Lugo, Toscano, & Watson, 2020; Jacobs, Yiu, Watson, &
Dell, 2015). Conversely, producing words with partial overlap in their
initial segments (e.g., candy and candle) in succession results in longer

word durations for the second word (Myers & Watson, 2019; Watson,
Buxo Lugo, & Simmons, 2015; Yiu & Watson, 2015).
The tendency to slow down when producing two words with initial
segmental overlap was first demonstrated by Sevald and Dell (1994),
who asked participants to repeat two-word phrases as quickly as
possible. They found that producing words with initial overlap (e.g.,
pick-pin) yielded slower speech rates than producing words with final
(rhyme) overlap (e.g., pick-tick). They explained this result using a
model in which phonemes are accessed in sequential order, and acti­
vation of one phoneme triggers activation of the next phoneme. When
word onsets overlap (pi-), both words in the pair become activated (pick
and pin), resulting in competition that the production system must
resolve to produce the intended next phoneme (− k or –n) in the current
word. Similar results to Sevald and Dell have been found more recently
in more naturalistic description tasks with effects on phonetic duration
(Yiu & Watson, 2015; Watson et al., 2015; Buxó-Lugo, Jacobs, & Wat­
son, 2020; Myers & Watson, 2019).
Interestingly, slowdowns of speech rate can occur independent of
whether the speaker or someone else produces the first word in an

* Corresponding author at: 417 Wakara Way, Salt Lake City, UT, United States.
E-mail address: brett.myers@hsc.utah.edu (B.R. Myers).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2025.104649
Received 18 March 2024; Received in revised form 27 April 2025; Accepted 28 April 2025
Available online 30 April 2025
0749-596X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

B.R. Myers et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

overlapping pair. Buxó-Lugo, Jacobs, and Watson (2020) used an event
description task in which participants named images on a screen that
would shrink or flash. Participants either produced or heard a recording
of the first word (the prime), or silently mouthed the prime, or did not
mention it. The participants always said the second word (the target) out
loud. They found that initial phonological overlap led to longer target
word duration when the prime word was said aloud—either by the
participant or someone else, but there was no lengthening when the
prime word was silently mouthed or unmentioned. This suggests that the
speaker’s auditory memory of the prime word is a critical anchor point
for target productions. That is, simply hearing a word can trigger
slowdowns when producing a similar-sounding word, while silent
articulation does not. Jacobs, Yiu, Watson, and Dell (2015) showed a
similar effect using repetition reduction, in which repeated words and
homophones were reduced when said aloud but not when unnamed or
silently mouthed. These findings demonstrate the importance of the
auditory experience of a prime word in the temporal dynamics of
phonological encoding.
An open question is understanding the nature of the representations
that are selected in the serial ordering process. The serial selection and
ordering of sounds may lead one to believe that speech sounds are
organized like beads on a string, with each sound occurring as a discrete,
invariant unit. However, we know that the same sound can vary
depending on context, co-articulation, and reduction (Shattuck-Hufna­
gel, 2019; Turk & Shattuck-Hufnagel, 2020). For instance, the final /n/
in fun may become /ng/ when one claims to be a fun guy. The final /s/ in
this may be removed completely when referring to this shirt. Some words
like “probably” may be reduced in a variety of ways ([′prɒbəbli],
[′prɒbli], or [′prɒli]), and some groups of words may be reduced, as in
“jever” (did you ever) or “io-noh” (I don’t know). Despite surface-level
differences, listeners are still able to extract the speaker’s meaning
(Niebuhr & Kohler, 2011; Manuel, 1995; Gow, 2001). This phonetic
variation makes it clear that there are differences between how a sound
is realized (phonetic representation) and its abstract category (phono­
logical representation). The question we pose here aims to pinpoint at
which level such encoding occurs. Said another way, does the ordering
of sounds occur at an abstract phonological level or at the level of
phonetic realization? To tackle this question, we leverage dialect dif­
ferences in the realization of vowels in American English.

speaker with their own dialect or one with the opposite pattern with
respect to the pin-pen merger. The logic of the experiments below is as
follows: speakers hear a recorded prime and then produce a target ut­
terance. The prime and target words overlap in their initial sounds, so
we expect lengthening of the target word. Importantly, the dialect in the
recorded prime either matched or mismatched the dialect of the
participant. We have seen that words lengthen when someone hears or
utters a phonologically overlapping word to one that they are about to
produce (Buxó-Lugo et al., 2020). If the acoustic details of the prime
dialect meaningfully differ from that of the participant, we expect this to
modulate the effect of phonological overlap. That is, if the serial
ordering of phonemes relies on phonetic cues, then the degree of
lengthening should be increased when the dialects are shared because
their pronunciations will be more similar to the primes. However, if
serial ordering happens at an abstract level beyond the acoustic reali­
zation of words, then we expect the effect of overlap on phonetic
duration will be comparable regardless of whether the participant and
prime dialects match or mismatch, as the underlying representations
will be effectively identical.
Data availability
The data and materials collected and analyzed during the current
study are available in the Open Science Framework repository, htt
ps://osf.io/pg5nz/?view_only=0916637535e34e5e8001db5c24734
8c0.
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 tests whether participants are sensitive to differences
in the phonetic and phonological forms of the words they hear. We
presented prime-target pairs that shared phonological segments while
manipulating the phonetic detail of the prime (i.e., including the pin-pen
merger or not).
Methods
Participants
There were 52 participants (age range: 18–22 years old, M = 19.6, SD
= 1.3, 36 female) in Experiment 1. Participants were recruited from the
Vanderbilt University Psychology Department subject pool and received
course credit. All participants provided informed consent in accordance
with the Vanderbilt University Institutional Review Board (IRB
#160070).

The pin-pen merger in Southern American English
We take advantage of a difference between varieties of English in the
United States that do and do not have the pin-pen merger to test whether
serial ordering is driven by phonological or phonetic representations.
This dialect feature is a merger of the vowels /ɪ/ and /ε/ before nasal
consonants across a wide geographical region, including most of the U.S.
South, parts of the Midwest, and parts of California (Labov et al., 2006;
Austen, 2020; Brown, 1991), as well as varieties of African-American
English across the U.S. Traditionally, this merger has been described
as merging toward [ɪ], making “pen” sound like “pin” (e.g., Brown,
1991; Bakos, 2013). However, Austen (2020) demonstrates that the
merger may also favor [ε] in production, such that “twin” sounds like
“twen.”.
While most work on the pin-pen merger has focused on production,
Austen (2020) found that individuals may also be merged in perception.
She found a subset of Americans who cannot hear the difference be­
tween “pin” and “pen”, even though their own productions are distinct.
This is known as a near-merger, and it occurs about half as often as the
full merger. Furthermore, Austen suggests that the merger may be
reversing itself because she found it more prevalent in older rather than
younger individuals. Still, the pin-pen merger is a natural form of pho­
netic variation that is common across the United States.
To better understand the type of sound sequence representations that
are used in speech planning, we designed three experiments examining
word lengthening effects by manipulating whether participants heard a

Dialect screening
At the start of the study visit, participants completed a brief
screening to determine whether their dialect included the pin-pen
merger or not. For this screening, they were instructed to read aloud a
paragraph presented on a computer screen. The paragraph was designed
for this study, and it included eleven merger words (see Appendix).
Participants were recorded via a head-mounted microphone at a sam­
pling rate of 44,100 Hz. The first author classified speakers as having the
merger or not based on auditory perception of the recorded passage.
There were 42 participants who spoke with the non-merged dialect
and 10 participants were identified as having the pin-pen merger by
perceptual assessment. This assessment was supported by analysis of
vowel formants in the screening passage. The passage included 11 in­
stances of merger-specific [ε] and 11 instances of [ɪ]. The Montreal
Forced Aligner (McAuliffe et al., 2017) identified time points of these
vowels, and a Praat script captured the F1 and F2 formants at the
midpoint of each vowel. The mean formant values across all participants
are shown in Fig. 1.
All participants were randomly assigned to hear a prime speaker who
either had the merger or did not. The prime speakers were two fema­
les—one who speaks with the pin-pen merger and one who does not. The
2

B.R. Myers et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

Austen (2020) found that in the pin-pen merger, Pillai scores below 0.4
are a good indicator that [ɪ] and [ε] are merged. We performed a
MANOVA for each pair of vowels per speaker. Our data are consistent
with a high level of overlap (Pillai = 0.016) in [ɪ] and [ε] for the merged
speaker (see Table 1.).
Materials
A set of 141 color images was selected from the Snodgrass and
Vanderwart (1980) dataset (Rossion & Pourtois, 2001) and Clipart-style
web images. A subset of 54 images served as the critical items, and the
remaining images were filler items. Critical items consisted of 18 targets
and 36 primes. There were two conditions for prime-target pairs:
1. Overlap: The pendant shrinks. The penny flashes.
2. Control: The rabbit shrinks. The penny flashes.
In the overlap condition, the prime-target pairs had phonological
overlap in the initial segment. In the control condition, the prime-target
pairs had no phonological overlap.
A Latin square design yielded four counterbalanced lists of items.
Each participant was presented with 18 critical prime-target pairs, and
each list had nine critical pairs for each of the two conditions. In addi­
tion, participants were exposed to 18 non-critical pairs, drawn from the
filler items, for a total of 36 trials in the experiment. Trials were ran­
domized for each participant.
Procedure
Participants completed the experiment on a Mac computer in MAT­
LAB using the CogToolbox (Fraundorf et al., 2014) and Psychophysics
Toolbox 3 (Kleiner et al., 2007). Following the dialect screening, par­
ticipants completed a training task to learn the names of potentially
ambiguous items. Items were displayed in the center of the screen with
the intended label at the top of the screen, and participants recited the
label aloud. They were reminded to use these names during the
experiment.
Participants were then instructed on the experimental task. For each
trial, four images were displayed equidistant around the center of the
screen (see Fig. 2). The prime image would shrink, and an audio
recording described the action (“The [image] shrinks”). As described
above, participants heard either the merger or non-merger prime
speaker for the duration of the experiment. Then the target image would
flash, and participants described the action (“The [image] flashes”).
Events occurred in the same order for all trials (i.e., shrinking then
flashing). Trials were randomized and separated into two blocks,
allowing participants to take a break between blocks as needed.

Fig. 1. F1-F2 formant values for [ɪ] (“IH”) and [ε] (“EH”) in Experiment 1. Top:
The prime word vowels are plotted for both prime speakers—merger (“M”) and
non-merger (“N”). Bottom: Each participant’s mean F1-F2 formants for the
screening words are plotted. Non-merger (“N”) speakers show a separation
between “IH” and “EH”, whereas merger (“M”) speakers show an overlap. The
ellipses represent 68% confidence intervals or one standard deviation.

speakers were recorded in an audiometric sound booth, and they were
asked to read the same list of stimuli sentences with comfortable pitch
and loudness. The formant analysis used for participants was also
applied to the prime speaker recordings. The prime vowel formant
values are displayed in Fig. 1. By random assignment, 25 participants
heard a prime speaker that matched their own dialect, and 27 partici­
pants heard a speaker that did not match their dialect. Of the partici­
pants with the merger, 5 heard the merged prime, and 5 heard the nonmerged prime. Of the non-merged participants, 22 heard the merged
prime, and 20 heard the non-merged prime.
The prime speaker vowels were compared to verify that participants
were presented with distinct vowels for the non-merged speaker but
overlapping [ɪ] and [ε] vowels for the merged speaker. The degree of
overlap between F1 and F2 values of the vowels was calculated as a Pillai
score. A Pillai score is an output of a MANOVA, and it is an approach to
determine how much two distributions (i.e., vowel formants) overlap
(Hay, Warren, & Drager, 2006; Nycz & Hall-Lew, 2014). Pillai values
range from 0 to 1, where 0 indicates complete overlap and 1 indicates
distinct distributions. While there is generally no established threshold
to demonstrate that two vowels are merged (Stanley & Sneller, 2023),

Acoustic analysis
Participant responses were segmented manually in Praat (Boersma &
Weenink, 2017) to measure the duration of the target words. Three
coders analyzed a subset of all trials in isolation using spectrographic
and waveform information, and coders were blind to experimental
condition of the trials. Coders were trained to identify target phonemes
from spectrographic characteristics. Target words were segmented from
start to end such that they were not identifiable as anything other than
the targets (see Fig. 3). Duration of each target word was calculated with
a custom Praat script.

Table 1
Pillai scores and p-values from MANOVA output for the [ɪ] and [ε] vowels for
both prime speakers in Experiment 1.

3

Non-merged Speaker

Merged Speaker

Vowels

Pillai

p

Pillai

p

[ɪ] vs [ε]

0.775

< 0.001

0.016*

0.885

B.R. Myers et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

Fig. 2. Example layout of the experiment display consisting of four images in each quadrant of the screen. In this example, the pendant (prime) will flash and the
penny (target) will shrink. The ball and apple are filler items.

Fig. 3. Example word segmentation in Praat. Boundaries are placed at the start and end points of the target word: bench.

Statistical analysis
Following prior work with similar manipulations (Jacobs et al.,
2020), target word durations were log transformed and analyzed using
Bayesian linear mixed effects models with non-informative priors. We
note that while there is some evidence that log transformation of du­
rations and reaction times can lead to adverse inferences (Burchill &
Jaeger, 2024), we report only the log transformed durations as the re­
sults were effectively identical when raw durations were used. Condition
(sum coded with Overlap as 1 and No Overlap as –1), Dialect Match
between the prime and participant (sum coded with Match as 1 and No
Match as –1), and their interaction were included as fixed effects.
Random slopes and intercepts by item and by participant were included
for each main effect. Models were built using R package brms version
2.18.0 (Bürkner, 2017). We point out results where the 95 % credible
interval for an estimated coefficient excludes 0.

Results
Target word durations were analyzed, and only target utterances that
were the intended label were included. Trials were excluded if partici­
pants mispronounced the target, or if they used alternate labels (e.g.,
doctor for dentist, chicken for hen, or coin for penny). A total of 75 out of
936 trials met these exclusion criteria, leaving a total of 861 trials for
analysis.
Our analysis finds evidence for an effect of condition, such that target
words that had phonological overlap with the prime word were pro­
duced with longer durations than non-overlapping targets (see Table 2).
Neither Dialect Match status nor the interaction between Condition and
Dialect Match had 95 % credible intervals (CIs) that excluded 0; how­
ever, these effects were nearly observed. Fig. 4 shows average duration
data by condition, prime dialect, and participant dialect.

4

B.R. Myers et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

longer than the control vowel condition independent of dialect match.

Table 2
Bayesian multilevel model fixed effect estimates for log target word durations in
Experiment 1. Effects with 95% CIs that exclude 0 are noted with an asterisk.
Fixed Effects

β

Est. Error

95 % CIs

Condition*
Dialect Match
Condition x Dialect Match

0.04
− 0.03
0.00

0.01
0.02
0.01

[0.03, 0.06]
[-0.08, 0.01]
[-0.01, 0.01]

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants
In Experiment 2, there were 48 participants (range: 18–22 years old,
M = 19.5, SD = 1.4, 32 female). Participants were recruited and
informed consent was obtained as in Experiment 1. Prior to analysis,
three participants were excluded for not adhering to the instructions of
the experiment (e.g., saying both the prime and target words).

Discussion
In this experiment, we measured the duration of target words that
either did or did not have phonological overlap with a prime. As pre­
dicted, there was evidence for lengthening in words with initial
phonological overlap, which is consistent with previous studies inves­
tigating this effect (Yiu & Watson, 2015; Watson et al., 2015; Buxó-Lugo
et al., 2020; Myers & Watson, 2019). This lengthening supports the
notion that phonological representations can be primed and overlapping
word forms can slow down production processes.
Our primary research question was understanding whether the
acoustic realization of the prime phonemes matters in the overlap
lengthening process. If phonological encoding is based on acoustic cues
of phonemes, the lengthening effect should be modulated by the simi­
larity between the dialects of the speaker and the prime. Contrary to this
proposal, we see no evidence of an interaction between Dialect Match
and Condition. That is, lengthening occurred regardless of whether the
participant had the same dialect as the prime speaker or not. This pro­
vides initial evidence that phonological encoding is based on abstract
representations of phonemes rather than the acoustic feature cues of
phonemes.
Of course, an alternative explanation is that the lengthening effects
are driven by the initial phoneme alone. That is, all primes minimally
overlapped with targets in the first segment, in addition to varying in the
vowel. To rule out this possibility, we conducted Experiment 2, which
investigates the role of the vowel in these prime-target word pairs by
including a condition in which the initial consonant and vowel overlap
depending on dialect (overlap condition), a condition in which only the
initial consonant overlaps (control vowel condition), and a condition
with no overlap (control condition). If the effect of Experiment 1 was a
result of consonant overlap alone, then we would expect the overlap and
control vowel conditions to differ from the control condition but not
from each other. On the other hand, if the effects were due to an abstract
vowel representation, we would expect the overlap condition to be

Dialect screening
At the start of the study visit, participants completed the same
screening as before to determine the presence of the pin-pen merger in
their dialect. We used the same procedure from Experiment 1, using
perceptual assessment and acoustic analysis to identify the merger
participants. In this experiment, 37 participants had a non-merged di­
alect, and 8 participants were identified as having the pin-pen merger.
The mean F1 and F2 formant values across all participants are shown in
Fig. 5.
Participants were randomly assigned to hear a prime speaker who
either had the merger or did not. This experiment used two different
female speakers, and their mean vowel formants are displayed in Fig. 5.
After random assignment, 20 participants heard primes that matched
their own dialect, and 25 participants heard primes that did not match
their dialect. Of the participants with the merger, 3 heard the merged
prime, and 5 heard the non-merged prime. Of the non-merged partici­
pants, 20 heard the merged prime, and 17 heard the non-merged prime.
The prime speaker vowels were measured to verify that participants
were presented with distinct vowels for the non-merged speaker but
overlapping [ɪ] and [ε] vowels for the merged speaker. The degree of
overlap between vowels was calculated as a Pillai score. We performed a
MANOVA for each pair of vowels per speaker, which included the F1 and
F2 values for all prime word vowels. Our data are consistent with a high
level of overlap (Pillai = 0.018) in [ɪ] and [ε] for the merged speaker
(see Table 3.).
Materials
A set of 222 color images was selected from the Snodgrass and
Vanderwart (1980) dataset (Rossion & Pourtois, 2001) and Clipart. A

Fig. 4. Boxplots showing target word durations in seconds. Mean durations are represented by solid points.
5

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

B.R. Myers et al.

word had /æ/ in the initial syllable, while the target word had /ε/ in the
same position. In the control condition, the prime-target pairs had no
phonological overlap.
A Latin square design yielded six counterbalanced lists of items. Each
participant was presented with 33 critical prime-target pairs, with
eleven critical pairs for each prime condition. In addition, participants
were exposed to 47 non-critical pairs, drawn from the filler items, for a
total of 80 trials in the experiment. Trial order was randomized for each
participant.
Procedure
This experiment used the same procedures as Experiment 1,
including the training session at the beginning to learn target labels for
ambiguous images. For each experimental trial, the prime image would
shrink, and an audio recording described the action. Again, two different
female talkers were used for the primes—one with the pin-pen merger
and one without it. After hearing the audio recording, the target image
would flash, and participants described the action. Trials were ran­
domized and separated into four blocks, allowing for breaks as needed.
Statistical analysis
Participant responses were segmented as in Experiment 1 by three
coders. The duration of each target word was calculated from a custom
Praat script. Log transformed target word durations were analyzed using
Bayesian mixed effects models with non-informative priors. Condition
(dummy coded with the Control-vowel condition as the comparison
group), Dialect Match (sum coded with Match as 1 and No-Match as –1),
and their interactions were included as fixed effects, along with random
slopes and intercepts by item and by participant for each of the effects
except the interaction. We point out results where the 95 % credible
interval for an estimated coefficient excludes 0.
Results
Only target utterances containing the intended word label were
included in the analyses. A total of 400 out of 1485 trials were removed
due to misnamed targets or a missing response, leaving a total of 1085
trials for analysis. Excluded trials were evenly distributed across
conditions.
The models show evidence of an effect of Condition, such that target
words with the control vowel were longer than non-overlapping targets,
but also slightly shorter than target words in the overlap condition (see
Table 4). Similar to results from Experiment 1, there was no evidence of
an interaction between Condition and Dialect Match, suggesting that
lengthening was not modulated by the phonetic similarity between
productions from the speaker of the target word and the speaker of the
prime. Fig. 6 shows average duration data by condition, prime dialect,
and participant dialect.

Fig. 5. F1-F2 formant values for [ɪ] (“IH”) and [ε] (“EH”) in Experiment 2. Top:
The prime word vowels are plotted for both prime speakers—merger (“M”) and
non-merger (“N”). Bottom: Each participant’s mean values for the screening
words are plotted. The ellipses represent 68% confidence intervals or one
standard deviation.
Table 3
Pillai scores and p-values from MANOVA output for the [ɪ] and [ε] vowels for
both prime speakers in Experiment 2.
Non-merged Speaker

Merged Speaker

Vowels

Pillai

p

Pillai

p

[ɪ] vs [ε]
[ɪ] vs [ӕ]
[ε] vs [ӕ]

0.787
0.806
0.742

< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001

0.018*
0.751
0.455

0.759
< 0.001
0.002

Discussion
Experiment 2 examined whether the lengthening effects of overlap in
Experiment 1 were due to competing abstract phonological encoding
processes driven by shared initial consonants and vowels for targets and
primes, or whether they were due to the target and prime simply sharing

subset of 132 images served as the critical items, and the remaining
images were filler items. Critical items consisted of 33 targets, with 3
potential primes (i.e., 99 prime images in total) belonging to three
conditions:

Table 4
Bayesian multilevel model fixed effect estimates for log target word durations in
Experiment 2. Effects with 95% CIs that exclude 0 are noted with an asterisk.

1. Overlap: The pendant shrinks. The penny flashes.
2. Control Vowel: The panda shrinks. The penny flashes.
3. Control: The rabbit shrinks. The penny flashes.
In the overlap condition, the prime-target pairs had phonological
overlap as in Experiment 1. In the control vowel condition, the prime
6

Fixed Effects

β

Est. Error

95 % CIs

Condition: Control vs. Control Vowel*
Condition: Overlap vs. Control Vowel*
Dialect Match
Dialect Match x Control
Dialect Match x Overlap

− 0.13
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.01

0.02
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.01

[-0.17, − 0.09]
[0.01, 0.06]
[-0.04, 0.05]
[-0.04, 0.04]
[-0.02, 0.03]

B.R. Myers et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

Fig. 6. Boxplots showing target word durations in seconds in Experiment 2. Mean durations are represented by solid points.

an initial consonant. The data from Experiment 2 suggest that both of
these sources of overlap affected word durations.
Word pairs with initial consonant and vowel overlap (e.g., pendantpenny) showed the greatest lengthening. Word pairs with the control
vowel /æ/ (e.g., panda-penny) also showed significant lengthening,
suggesting the initial consonant is enough to elicit the lengthening ef­
fect. It is also possible that the overlapping nasalization from the postvocalic consonant could have contributed to the lengthening effect.
Critically, there was a significant difference between the overlap and
control vowel condition, demonstrating that lengthening in the overlap
condition occurred whether a participant’s vowel production matched
or did not match the prime speaker’s production. There was also no
significant Dialect Match by Condition interaction, suggesting that the
treatment of the vowel conditions was not dependent on the prime di­
alect. Although this lack of an interaction is a null result, our Bayesian
approach to the analysis suggests support for a lack of a difference be­
tween groups.

Dialect screening
At the start of the study visit, participants completed the same
screening as Experiments 1 and 2 to determine the presence of the pinpen merger in their dialect. We used the same procedure of perceptual
assessment and acoustic analysis to identify the merger participants. In
this experiment, we chose to only use data from individuals who had the
non-merger dialect. Two participants exhibited the merger, and those
two were excluded from data analysis. The remaining 71 participants
were included in the study. Prime and participant formant values are
displayed in Fig. 7.
Materials & procedures
The stimulus images and prime speakers used in this experiment
were identical to Experiment 2. The same three conditions were
used—overlap, control vowel, and control. As before, there were 33
critical prime-target pairs and 47 non-critical pairs, for a total of 80
trials. The same training session occurred at the beginning of the
experiment to teach participants the target labels of potentially ambig­
uous images.
For each experimental trial, the prime image would shrink, and an
audio recording described the action. Participants were randomly
assigned to hear the speaker with the pin-pen merger or the one without
the merger. After hearing the audio recording, the target image flashed,
and participants described the action. Trials were randomized and
separated into four blocks, allowing for breaks as needed.

Experiment 3
One limitation in Experiment 2 is the relatively small number of
observations to detect an interaction between Dialect Match and Con­
dition. There may not have been enough participants to support the
claim that word lengthening in the overlap condition happens regardless
of the prime dialect. Therefore, we conducted a third experiment with
the goal of recruiting more participants to answer the question—does
the prime dialect matter in the overlap lengthening effect? To help
clarify the results, we elected to include only participants with the nonmerger dialect in the third experiment.

Statistical analysis
Participant responses were segmented by five coders. The duration of
each target word was calculated from a custom Praat script. Log trans­
formed target word durations were analyzed using Bayesian mixed ef­
fects models with non-informative priors. Condition (dummy coded
with the Control-vowel condition as the comparison group), Prime Di­
alect (sum coded with Merger as 1 and Non-Merger as –1), and their
interactions were included as fixed effects, along with random slopes
and intercepts by item and by participant for each of the effects except
the interaction. Results were considered significant where the 95 %
credible interval for an estimated coefficient excluded 0.

Methods
Participants
In the current experiment, 73 participants were recruited (range:
18–60 years old, M = 28.8, SD = 9.73, 66 female). Participants were
volunteers recruited from campus announcements at the University of
Utah. All participants provided informed consent in accordance with the
University of Utah Institutional Review Board (IRB #00171949).

7

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

B.R. Myers et al.

Similar to results from Experiments 1 and 2, there was no evidence of an
interaction between Condition and Prime Dialect. This lack of an
interaction effect is replicated now with more participants to support the
claim. Fig. 8 shows average duration data by condition and prime
dialect.
General discussion
This study aimed to examine the phonological overlap lengthening
effect in the presence of dialect variation using the pin-pen merger.
Specifically, we were interested in testing the hypothesis that phono­
logical encoding could rely on acoustic properties of phonemes during
speech production. In Experiment 1, we observed word lengthening in
prime-target pairs with initial phonological overlap regardless of dialect
differences. In Experiment 2, we replicated this finding and ruled out the
possibility that the effect could be wholly explained by phonological
overlap of only the initial consonants in prime-target pairs. In Experi­
ment 3, we replicated the same findings with more participants to
support the claim. The overlap condition had the longest word dura­
tions, and it did not matter whether the acoustic realization of the vowel
was [ε] or [ɪ]. Overall, word lengthening occurred regardless of vowel
variation in the stimulus, suggesting abstract representations affect
phonological encoding (Fig. 9).
The primary question for these experiments was to determine if
acoustic properties or abstract phonological representations are
responsible for the word lengthening effect. Dialect variation was a
means to present naturalistic acoustic differences among repeated
phonemes. Future work may choose to replicate these experiments with
different mergers or other dialect features. One example would be the
glottal stop in the Cockney dialect of English. Researchers could
compare an American pronunciation of “butter” with a medial tap /ɾ/
versus a Cockney glottal stop /ʔ/. This would present a clear acoustic
distinction that is likely more obvious than the pin-pen separation used in
this study. It may also be interesting to compare pin-pen stimuli with pitpet stimuli to further test predictions of phonological versus phonetic
priming. These alternatives would provide additional investigations into
acoustic differences, and we leave that for future work. Still, the three
experiments presented here consistently demonstrate that word
lengthening is driven by phonological priming.
We acknowledge that dialect variation is complicated in the real
world, and our participants likely have had exposure to the pin-pen
merger whether they use it or not. We do not make claims about how
one’s dialect may influence the lengthening effect or how this effect will
manifest in cross-dialect communication. Furthermore, we did not
attempt to categorize or label the dialects of our participants; our pri­
mary interest was to determine the presence or absence of the pin-pen
merger as an acoustic feature of their speech patterns. As such, we are
able to make the basic claim about whether two speakers had an acoustic
match or mismatch of the target segments, which allowed us to directly
address our research question. Regardless of the phonetic properties of
the vowel, listeners seem to map surface-level acoustics onto their own
phonological representation of the vowel.
In Experiment 3, there was also a main effect of prime dialect. Par­
ticipants who heard the merged prime produced significantly longer
word durations than participants who heard the non-merged (standard)
prime. This is likely attributed to the merged speaker having a slightly
slower rate of speech than the non-merged speaker. This slower speech
rate is a characteristic of speakers who use the merger (e.g., Clopper &
Smiljanic, 2015). It is possible that participants aligned their own rate of
speech to the prime speaker’s rate. Previous work has shown that
speakers converge to a shared rate of speech in conversational settings,
and this rhythmic entrainment is mutually beneficial for the in­
terlocutors (e.g., Manson et al., 2013; Freud et al., 2018; Cohen Priva
et al., 2017). Additionally, speakers will converge to character­
istics—such as speech rate—when listening to a non-native speaker
(Wagner et al., 2021). Critically, we see no evidence that this difference

Fig. 7. F1-F2 formant values for [ɪ] (“IH”) and [ε] (“EH”) in Experiment 3. Top:
The prime word vowels are plotted for both prime speakers—merger (“M”) and
non-merger (“N”). Note these are the same prime speakers as in Experiment 2.
Bottom: Each participant’s mean values for the screening words are plotted. The
ellipses represent 68% confidence intervals or one standard deviation.

Results
Experiment 3 included 71 participants who were randomly assigned
to a prime condition; 35 participants heard the merged prime speaker,
and 36 participants heard the non-merged prime speaker. Out of 2,343
possible responses, 339 trials were removed due to misnamed targets or
a missing response—leaving 2,004 trials for analysis. Excluded trials
were evenly distributed across conditions.
The models show evidence of an effect of Condition, such that target
words with the control vowel were longer than non-overlapping targets
and also shorter than target words in the overlap condition (see Table 5).
Table 5
Bayesian multilevel model fixed effect estimates for log target word durations in
Experiment 3. Effects with 95% CIs that exclude 0 are noted with an asterisk.
Fixed Effects

В

Est. Error

95 % CIs

Condition: Control vs. Control Vowel*
Condition: Overlap vs. Control Vowel*
Prime Dialect*
Prime Dialect x Control Vowel
Prime Dialect x Overlap

− 0.08
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.00

0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00

[0.07, 0.09]
[0.03, 0.05]
[0.02, 0.04]
[0.00, 0.02]
[0.00, 0.01]

8

B.R. Myers et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

Fig. 8. Boxplots showing target word durations in seconds in Experiment 3. Mean durations are represented by solid points. All participants either heard the merged
prime or the non-merged (standard) prime.

supports the idea that speech planning operates over abstract phono­
logical representations. In the instances where a participant dialect did
not match the prime speaker’s, we hypothesize that the participant hears
the given phoneme and encodes their own representation of that
phoneme. It is not evident that the participant encodes the acoustic
properties of the phoneme in a way that interferes with their own pro­
duction. Although this finding does not rule out the role of surface-level
acoustic features in speech planning, it does suggest that abstract rep­
resentations play a central role in speech production.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Brett R. Myers: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation,
Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Cassandra L. Ja­
cobs: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Andrés Buxó-Lugo:
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis. Duane G. Watson: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Data curation,
Conceptualization.

Fig. 9. Illustration of phonological encoding in the presence of dialect varia­
tion. Regardless of the stimulus dialect, the listener interprets the phonological
sequence with an abstract representation of the segment.

in speech rate interacted with the lengthening effect.
An important note about these experiments is that the effects we
report are small. Of course, this raises the question of whether these
small effects are due to the processes described above being peripheral
to language production (and consequently of little interest to language
production researchers), or whether the processes are central to lan­
guage production, but the measures we use to detect them are relatively
noisy. We think the latter is likely. We are trying to detect serial pro­
cessing effects by measuring word duration in a comprehension to
production, priming/interference paradigm. This paradigm is rarely
used in the production literature and not as well understood as the
“usual suspects” of psycholinguistics (e.g., eye fixations, reaction times,
or speech onset times). Future work will need to explore the limits of the
paradigm to better estimate the effect sizes reported here. Having said
that, although the effects are small, the theoretical predictions are clear,
and the data reported above suggest that abstract phonological repre­
sentations are used in serially ordering speech.
The critical finding in these experiments was that word lengthening
occurred despite differences in the acoustic properties of speech. This

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by funding from the National Science
Foundation [Grant Number 1557097]. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation. The authors would like to thank Maya Ricketts, Ella
Dixon, Jenna DiStefano, Russell deJesus, Darla Lowe, Emily Carter, and
Danielle Toth for assistance with data collection and analysis.
9

B.R. Myers et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

Appendix A
Reading passage for pin-pen merger screening. Eleven merger words are italicized.
My friend and I went to an Italian restaurant to celebrate her birthday. She ordered the penne pasta and I asked for linguine. Our server Wendy took
our menus, and before we knew it, Ken the bartender was pouring champagne for both of us. The manager—I think her name was Julie—brought us our
food. Then we heard music and ten servers came over to sing Happy Birthday, and they placed a large chocolate cake in the center of the table. It was a
birthday to remember.
Appendix B
Critical Stimuli for Experiment 1.

Prime

Target

bend
center
den
denim
fender
henge
lentil
membrane
memo
pendant
penguin
sender
sensor
temper
tempest
ten
tendon
trend

bench
sentence
dent
dentist
fencer
hen
lender
member
menu
penny
pencil
centaur
senate
temple
tempo
tent
tender
trench

Appendix C
Critical Stimuli for Experiments 2 & 3.

Overlap Prime

Control Vowel Prime

Target

bend
center
century
den
denim
embryo
employee
end
enemy
enzyme
fender
gentleman
henge
lemming
lens
lentil
membrane
memo
pendant
penguin
pentagon
penthouse
rent
sender
sensor
stent
temper
tempest
ten

band
sandwich
sandpaper
dance
dancer
amazon
amplitude
and
animal
antler
phantom
janitor
hand
lampshade
land
landing
mantle
mango
panther
pancake
panelist
panda
ranch
sander
sandbox
stand
tanker
tango
tam

bench
sentence
centerpiece
dent
dentist
emperor
empire
en
energy
entrance
fencer
general
hen
lemon
length
lender
member
menu
penny
pencil
pendulum
penlight
wrench
centaur
senate
stench
temple
tempo
tent
(continued on next page)

10

B.R. Myers et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104649

(continued )
Overlap Prime

Control Vowel Prime

Target

tenant
tendon
trend
venom

tangent
tandem
tram
vandal

tenor
tender
trench
vendor

Data availability

Jacobs, C. L., Yiu, L. K., Watson, D. G., & Dell, G. S. (2015). Why are repeated words
produced with reduced durations? Evidence from inner speech and homophone
production. Journal of Memory and Language, 84, 37–48.
Kleiner, M., Brainard, D., & Pelli, D. (2007). What’s new in Psychtoolbox-3? Perception,
36(14), 1–16.
Labov, W., Ash, S., & Boberg, C. (2006). The Atlas of North American English. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Lam, T. Q., & Watson, D. G. (2010). Repetition is easy: Why repeated referents have
reduced prominence. Memory & Cognition, 38, 1137–1146.
Manson, J. H., Bryant, G. A., Gervais, M. M., & Kline, M. A. (2013). Convergence of
speech rate in conversation predicts cooperation. Evolution and Human Behavior, 34
(6), 419–426.
Manuel, S. Y. (1995). Speakers nasalize /dh/ after /n/, but listeners still hear /dh/.
Journal of Phonetics, 23(4), 453–476.
McAuliffe, M., Socolof, M., Stengel-Eskin, E., Mihuc, S., Wagner, M., & Sonderegger, M.
(2017). Montreal Forced Aligner [Computer program]. Version, 1.
Myers, B., & Watson, D. (2019). Paying the meter: Effects of metrical similarity on word
lengthening. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 26(6), 1941–1947.
Niebuhr, O., & Kohler, K. (2011). Perception of phonetic detail in the identification of
highly reduced words. Journal of Phonetics, 39, 319–329.
Nycz, J., & Hall-Lew, L. (2014). Best practices in measuring vowel merger. In Proceedings
of Meetings on Acoustics (p. 20).
Rossion, B., & Pourtois, G. (2001). Revisiting Snodgrass and Vanderwart’s object
database: Color and texture improve object recognition. Journal of Vision, 1, 413a.
Sevald, C. A., & Dell, G. S. (1994). The sequential cuing effect in speech production.
Cognition, 53, 91–127.
Shattuck-Hufnagel, S. (2019). Toward an (even) more comprehensive model of speech
production planning. Language, Cognition, and Neuroscience, 34(9), 1202–1213.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized set of 260 pictures: Norms for
name agreement, familiarity and visual complexity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning & Memory, 6, 174–215.
Stanley, J. A., & Sneller, B. (2023). Sample size matters in calculating Pillai scores. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 153(1), 54–67.
Turk, A. E., & Shattuck-Hufnagel, S. (2020). Speech timing. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wagner, M. A., Broersma, M., McQueen, J. M., Dhaene, S., & Lemhöfer, K. (2021).
Phonetic convergence to non-native speech: Acoustic and perceptual evidence.
Journal of Phonetics, 88.
Watson, D. G., Buxo Lugo, A. S., & Simmons, D. C. (2015). The Effect of Phonological
Encoding on Word Duration: Selection Takes Time (Vol. 46,, 85–98.
Yiu, L. K., & Watson, D. G. (2015). When overlap leads to competition: Effects of
phonological encoding on word duration. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22,
1701–1708.

Data will be made available on request.
