Introduction
Reading is a demanding task for the visual system, requiring fastpaced eye movements and efficient recognition of visually complex
words from sets of crowded letters, all while integrating this information
into dynamic semantic and syntactic structures. Although reading is a
challenging task for the untrained visual system, it is a common part of
daily life for many humans and becomes effortless for many readers after
years of practice, leading to average reading rates of about 4 words per
second (Brysbaert, 2019). Reading is a behavior learned through expe­
rience, and was culturally invented too recently to have driven signifi­
cant brain evolution. Hence, reading offers a unique avenue to uncover
effects of real-world experience on vision.
In addition, reading is much more constrained than most common
visual tasks. For example, proficient readers of the Latin script have
viewed a relatively small set of letter shapes millions of times, in a
particular part of the visual field and attentional context (scanning
across the horizontal meridian), and for a particular purpose (to bind

letters into words, and ultimately into meaning). This highly constrained
and frequently repeated task may lead to systematic changes in aspects
of vision that adapt visual processing to the particular requirements of
reading through neuroplasticity. It is clear that relatively short-term
laboratory experiences can impact low-level visual processing (Sagi,
2011), but the effects of long-term real-world experience with specific
stimuli such as letters through particular behaviors like reading on
relatively low-level visual phenomena are largely unknown.
One visual phenomenon that is particularly relevant to reading is
visual crowding. In a classic study that documented a fundamental limit
on visual perception, Bouma (1970) demonstrated that a peripheral
letter could be accurately identified when presented in isolation but not
when flanked by nearby letters. This reduction in recognition due to
nearby items is known as visual crowding (Fig. 1 provides a demon­
stration). Importantly, Bouma also demonstrated that the distance at
which flankers crowd a target scales linearly with the distance of that
target from fixation (which has subsequently been termed “Bouma’s
law”; Pelli & Tillman, 2008). That is, a target letter presented 4◦ from

* Corresponding author at: Center for Mind & Brain, 267 Cousteau Pl, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
E-mail address: kpwinsler@ucdavis.edu (K. Winsler).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2025.104689
Received 28 January 2025; Received in revised form 24 June 2025; Accepted 9 August 2025
Available online 13 August 2025
0749-596X/© 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

crowding for upright letters may be particularly reduced near the point
of fixation.
A third relevant aspect of reading is that readers of scripts with a leftto-right organization, such as English and Spanish, rely heavily on
parafoveal information from the right side of fixation to control their eye
movements (Schotter, Angele, & Rayner, 2012), to guide recognition of
currently fixated words (Veldre & Andrews, 2016), and in some cases to
recognize upcoming words without fixating them (Rayner et al., 2011).
Consequently, readers of such languages may develop mechanisms that
specifically minimize crowding to the right of fixation (e.g., attentional
mechanisms that are preferentially applied to stimuli to the right of
fixation).
There is already some evidence that crowding effects differ between
letters and other types of stimuli. For example, recognition accuracy is
better for crowded letters than for crowded symbols (Grainger, Tydgat,
& Issele, 2010), and this advantage has been shown to be true particu­
larly for horizontally oriented arrays rather than vertically oriented
arrays (Vejnović & Zdravković, 2015). However, these experiments
compared letters with symbols or digits (e.g., Tydgat and Grainger,
2009; Grainger, Tydgat, & Issele, 2010; Vejnović & Zdravković, 2015;
Winsler, Grainger, & Holcomb, 2022), making it possible that the dif­
ferences in accuracy may be due to differences in the physical stimuli
themselves rather than differences in experience with the stimuli.
Additionally, almost all of these studies used behavioral accuracy at a
single target-flanker spacing as the dependent measure, potentially
reflecting post-perceptual processes (e.g. higher recognition accuracy
regardless of flanker spacing) rather than crowding itself (but see
Experiment 5 in Grainger, Tydgat & Issele, 2010). Moreover, no prior
research has examined whether individual differences in reading expe­
rience are associated with individual differences in crowding. Thus,
prior research does not clearly address the question of whether massive
visual experience with reading impacts crowding.
There are multiple underlying mechanisms that could potentially
lead to reduced crowding for upright letters, including changes in the
mechanisms responsible for crowding per se and improvements in letter
discriminability that allow letters to be accurately identified even in the
presence of nearby flankers. In either case, the functional consequence
would be a reduction in crowding for upright letters, which would
presumably minimize the deleterious consequences of crowding on
reading, allowing for faster and more accurate reading. This would
indicate that massive visual experience with a class of stimuli can reduce
the deleterious consequences of crowding for that stimulus class.

Fig. 1. Demonstration of crowding. Keep your eyes on the central fixation
crosshair for a given row while trying to perceive the letter(s) for that row. The
letter L can be perceived quite well at both a near eccentricity (a) and a far
eccentricity (b). However, the L becomes much more difficult to perceive when
crowded by nearby flanker letters at the near eccentricity (c) and practically
impossible to perceive at the far eccentricity (d). The fact that the L is easily
perceived in isolation indicates that low-level visual acuity is not the reason for
the difficulty of perceiving the L when it is crowded.

fixation would be degraded by flanking letters 2◦ on each side to
approximately the same extent that a target letter presented 10◦ from
fixation would be degraded by flanking letters 5◦ on each side.
Visual crowding is now known to occur for many types of stimuli and
is a major source of functional limitation in real-world vision. It reflects
fundamental properties of the visual system and provides clues to the
nature of object recognition and visual representation (Levi, 2008;
Whitney & Levi, 2011; Manassi & Whitney, 2018). Bouma’s original
study and much subsequent research (Pelli et al., 2007; Chung, 2007;
He, Legge, & Yu, 2013) has been concerned with crowding as a limita­
tion on reading, because letters are highly crowded within words.
Indeed, readers use crowded information from upcoming letters and
words that are as many as 15 character spaces away from fixation
(Rayner, 2009), and there is now considerable evidence that crowding is
a key limiting factor in both typical reading (Risse, 2014; Frömer et al.,
2015; He & Legge, 2017) and disorders of reading such as dyslexia (Joo
et al., 2018).
Here, however, we invert this relationship between crowding and
reading to ask a different question: To what extent does our massive
experience with reading reduce the effects of crowding? We focus on
three aspects of reading that might lead to corresponding changes in
crowding. First, reading involves massive experience with a relatively
small number of visually-similar characters, which are almost always
read in an upright orientation and frequently occur in closely spaced
strings (i.e., words). Further, both the precise identity and relative po­
sition of letters in words carry important information which disambig­
uate word identities during reading (e.g., the strings “salt” and “slat”
have completely different meanings), though transposed letter effects do
reveal that in some cases words with swapped letter positions are
recognizable (e.g., Perea & Lupker, 2004). This massive but highly
constrained reading experience may cause changes in how the visual
system processes letters, such that crowding is minimized for upright
characters. For example, letters could be processed using a narrower
spatial zone of integration or could be processed with reduced lateral
inhibition. Alternatively, neurons may become more narrowly tuned to
specific letters, such that different letters are more discriminable and can
therefore be recognized even when degraded by information from
nearby stimuli.
A second relevant aspect of reading is that the crowding of letters
must be overcome primarily in the fovea and parafovea, whereas many
other types of natural vision do not require individuating a large number
of discrete elements that are so closely spaced near the fovea. As a result,

The present studies
The present study addressed the question of whether reading expe­
rience impacts the effects of crowding using two preregistered,
converging approaches: a) an experimental approach in which we
compared crowding for upright letters with crowding for less familiar
stimuli, and b) an individual-differences approach in which we asked
whether specific attributes of crowding are related to proxy measures of
lifetime reading experience. As illustrated in Fig. 2, both experiments
used multiple target-flanker distances to establish the target-flanker
distance at which crowding occurred. We refer to this as the crowding
threshold (also known as critical distance), defined as the target-flanker
distance that yielded a target discrimination accuracy of 82 % correct.
This allowed us to determine whether familiarity impacts crowding per
se rather than impacting overall accuracy. We also tested multiple target
eccentricities on both the left and right sides of fixation so that we could
determine whether the spatial profile of crowding is different for upright
letters (i.e., decreased crowding for upright letters near fixation and in
the right visual field). Note that we focused here on radial crowding
along the horizontal meridian, which is the primary type of crowding
experienced during reading of left-to-right scripts.

2

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

Fig. 2. a. Example of a trial with upright letters in Study 1. The target was the central item in each three-item string of letters. After a period of fixation on the central
fixation point, a target and two flankers appeared for 100 ms. The target was unpredictably placed at one of three eccentricities in the left or right visual field. After a
500 ms of delay, an array of eight choice letters appeared and the participant used the mouse to click on the letter that matched the target. We also included catch
trials on which the target was presented without any flankers. b. Upright letter stimuli used in Studies 1a and 1b. c. Inverted letter stimuli used in Study 1a. d. Gabor
patch stimuli used in Study 1b. e. Upright letter stimuli used in Study 2.

Study 1: Experimental manipulation of stimuli

and Study 2 are available at https://osf.io/yw4mt/. This repository
contains links to the preregistrations for both studies.

In Study 1a, we assessed the effect of experience by comparing
crowding for upright letters with crowding for inverted letters. Inverted
letters are much less familiar than upright letters, but they provide a
much better control for low-level stimulus properties than other stimuli
such as symbols. For example, inverting a letter does not change peri­
metric complexity (Pelli et al., 2006), spatial frequency content, or basic
visual features. This makes it possible to be nearly certain that any
differences in crowding between upright and inverted letters were
caused by differences in experience rather than by intrinsic differences
in visual properties. We tested three predictions: a) that the visual sys­
tem can tolerate closer target-flanker distances for upright letters than
for inverted letters; b) that the advantage for upright letters would be
particularly strong near fixation; and c) that this advantage would be
greater to the right of fixation than to the left. Study 1b tested the same
predictions by comparing upright letters with Gabor patches, which are
unfamiliar but closely match the tuning properties of neurons in primary
visual cortex (Jones & Palmer, 1987). The primary goal of including the
Gabor patch condition was to measure crowding over spatial locations
with a commonly used simple stimulus to compare with letters. We
predicted that the differences in crowding between upright letters and
Gabor patches would be even stronger than the differences between
upright and inverted letters. However, because letters and Gabor
patches are very different stimuli, any observed differences in crowding
distance may be due to differences in experience or to differences in lowlevel stimulus properties. Nonetheless, given the widespread use of
Gabor patches in studies of crowding and other aspects of perception, it
is worth testing whether and how crowding differs between Gabor
patches and letters.

Method
Participants
The participants were undergraduate students enrolled in psychol­
ogy courses at the University of California, Davis. All participants used
for analysis were native and current readers of a Latin script (typically
English or Spanish), native being defined as learned as their first written
language or concurrently with their first written language. All partici­
pants reported having normal or corrected-to-normal vision. On the
basis of a power analysis of data from a pilot experiment similar to Study
1a (N = 57) we preregistered a sample size of 60 usable participants for
Studies 1a and 1b (see preregistration). Participants were considered
usable if they met minimal standards for on-task performance as
described below. All studies were approved by the Institutional Review
Board at the University of California, Davis and all participants provided
informed consent. In Study 1a, the average age of the 60 participants
was 19.57 years (SD = 1.65). In Study 1b, the average age was 19.24
years (SD = 2.1). Additional demographic information for participants
can be found in Table 1, which uses standard US-based categories for
race and ethnicity (US Office of Management and Budget, 2016).
Materials and procedure
Stimulus presentation and data collection were controlled using
PsychoPy (Pierce, 2007). Stimuli were presented on a HP ZR2440w LCD
display with a gray background (26.8 cd/m2) at a viewing distance of
100 cm. Viewing distance was measured for each participant and
maintained by requiring participants to sit with their back touching the
back of a chair which was placed such that the participant’s eyes in this
position were 100 cm from the center of the stimulus monitor. Experi­
menters carefully monitored participants to ensure that this viewing
distance was roughly controlled.

Data availability
Stimulus presentation scripts, data, and analysis scripts for Study 1
3

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

as our threshold as this is a commonly used threshold for QUEST stair­
cases. However, it should be noted that there is considerable variability
in the choice of threshold used to measure crowding distances within the
crowding literature, so care must be taken when comparing crowing
distance estimates across studies (e.g. see Kurzawski et al., 2023). For all
locations and stimulus conditions, the staircase had a prior of 0.5φ (i.e.
spacing of 50 % of the target’s eccentricity, φ) with an SD of.3φ. This
prior was centered at 0.5φ because this represents the traditional esti­
mate of the crowding distance (Bouma, 1970). Note that this measure of
spacing abstracts away from the raw target-flanker distances and in­
corporates the linear eccentricity scaling that is fundamental to
crowding (“Bouma’s law”; Pelli & Tillman, 2008). For example, both a
raw crowding threshold of 1◦ at an eccentricity of 4◦ and a raw crowding
threshold of 0.5◦ at an eccentricity of 2◦ would each correspond to a
scaled crowding threshold of 0.25φ. Thus, the null hypothesis for our
eccentricity manipulation was that the scaled crowding threshold would
be constant across eccentricities. The range of the QUEST staircase was
limited to sample values between a maximum spacing of 1 and a mini­
mum spacing of 0. The beta (shape) parameter for the staircase was fixed
at 3.5, the gamma (lower asymptote) parameter was fixed at 0.125 (i.e.,
1 divided by 8 possible answer choices), and the delta (upper asymptote)
parameter was fixed at 0.02.
As a quality control measure, each session also contained 48 catch
trials in which a target was presented without any flankers. These trials
were distributed unpredictably across the session and included three
trials for each of the 16 possible target stimuli (i.e. 3 for each letter and
inverted letter/Gabor patch), with eight trials at each of the six loca­
tions. The catch trials were designed to be easy, so below-ceiling accu­
racy on these trials likely indicates either insufficient visual acuity or
frequent lapses of attention. Participants were considered unusable if
they missed more than two of the 48 catch trials. Participants were also
considered unusable if more than two of the 12 staircases ended up at
the maximum flanker distance (a crowding threshold of greater than 95
% spacing, which is implausible for individuals with typical vision).
These exclusion criteria resulted in 7 unusable subjects in Study 1a, and
36 unusable subjects in Study 1b. Unusable participants were simply
replaced so that we could reach the target N of 60 usable participants in
each study. Individual staircases which were estimated to be near the
maximum value were also excluded from analysis (0.83 % of staircases
in Study 1a and 3.5 % of staircases in Study 1b). All of these data
exclusion procedures were specified in the preregistration. Note that the
increased number of excluded participants and staircases for Study 1b
compared to Study 1a indicates that the inclusion of Gabor patches led
to a more difficult task. Indeed, low performance in the Gabor patch
conditions was the reason for the majority of excluded participants (33
out of 36) and excluded staircases (25 out of 26) in Study 1b. Hence, care
should be taken when comparing the results of Study 1b with Study 1a,
as the exclusion criteria may have in effect caused a more stringent
sample selection for Study 1b. An analysis of the isolated catch trials,
which shows the uncrowded recognition accuracy for stimuli used in
Study 1, is available in the supplemental materials.

Table 1
Gender, race, and ethnicity data for participants in Study 1a, Study 1b, Study 2.
Demographics of Participants
Characteristic

Gender
Female
Male
Other gender or not reported
Race
Asian
White
Mixed race
Black
Native American
Other race or not reported
Ethnicity
Not Hispanic or Latino
Hispanic or Latino
Not reported

Study 1a (n =
60)
n
%

Study 1b (n =
60)
n
%

Study 2 (n =
250)
n
%

​

​

​

47
11
2

78.3
18.3
3.3

75
20
5

​

​

​

​

​

​

27
23
4
2
2
2

45
12
3

42
18
0

45
38.3
6.6
3.3
3.3
3.3
70
30
0

22.4
74.4
3.2

​

​

​

​

​

​

27
20
5
0
0
8

56
186
8

41
15
4

45
33.3
8.3
0
0
13.3
68.3
25
6.6

119
78
15
8
5
25
174
74
2

47.6
31.2
6
3.2
2
10
69.6
29.6
0.8

The stimuli and procedure are illustrated in Fig. 2. Studies 1a and 1b
were identical except that Study 1a compared upright letters (highly
familiar stimuli) with inverted letters (less familiar stimuli), whereas
Study 1b compared the same upright letters (highly familiar stimuli)
with Gabor patches (unfamiliar stimuli). In each study, the two stimulus
classes were factorially combined with 6 target locations on the visual
field: 2, 4, and 6 degrees of visual angle to the left and right of fixation
(on the horizontal meridian). The familiar upright letter stimuli were
selected from a set eight white letters (F, G, J, L, N, S, R, Z) drawn in
Arial font with a height of 1.0◦ and a luminance of 109 cd/m2 (Fig. 2b).
In Study 1a, the less familiar inverted letter stimuli were these same
letters inverted (i.e., flipped vertically, not rotated 180 degrees –
Fig. 2c). These specific letters were chosen to ensure that their upright
and inverted forms would be different from each other. In Study 1b, the
unfamiliar Gabor patch stimuli were selected from a set of eight Gabor
patches (Fig. 2d) with a spatial standard deviation of ± 0.33◦ that varied
in orientation (0◦ , 45◦ , 90◦ , or 135◦ from upright) and spatial frequency
(4 or 6 cycles/◦ ). In pilot testing, we found that these eight combinations
of orientation and spatial frequency led to performance levels that were
comparable to the eight inverted letters (which was not the case if we
used eight different orientations with a single spatial frequency). Note
that crowding is largely independent of the size of the target and flankers
(Tripathy & Cavanagh, 2002), so we held stimulus size constant across
eccentricities.
The task for each experiment was to identify the central stimulus in
the array of three stimuli presented in each trial. For each of the twelve
combinations of location and stimulus type, 50 trials were run, shuffled
such that each condition was approximately evenly distributed across
the 600 total trials. Each trial began with the subject fixating on a cir­
cular fixation point in the center of the screen, followed by a target
appearing for 100 ms. The target was flanked horizontally by nontarget
stimuli from the same set (e.g., nontarget inverted letters if the target
was an inverted letter). The target-flanker distance was determined by a
staircase procedure, described below. After 500 ms, a response array
appeared, with the 8 possible stimuli from the stimulus set for that trial
(e.g., the 8 inverted letters if it was an inverted trial, or the 8 Gabor
patches if it was a Gabor trial), randomly distributed in a 4 × 2 grid on
the screen. Subjects used a mouse to click on the stimulus that matched
the target from that trial. Hence, the task was 8AFC for all experiments.
After response, the fixation stimulus reappeared, and a new trial started
after 1 s. For each experiment, participants completed a 24-trial practice
version of the task before completing the actual experiment.
In each of the 12 conditions, the center-to-center distance between
the target and each flanker was set according to the recommended
“intensity” of a QUEST staircase (Watson & Pelli, 1983), targeting a
recognition accuracy of 82 % correct for that condition. We chose 82 %

Data analysis
The dependent variable was the crowding threshold, defined as the
target-flanker spacing (expressed as proportion of the target’s eccen­
tricity) required to achieve 82 % accuracy. This value was computed as
the mean of the posterior distribution for the 50-trial QUEST staircase
for each condition. Hence, each participant contributed 12 values to the
analysis – one crowding threshold for each combination of the two
stimulus conditions (upright letters and inverted letters/Gabor patches),
three eccentricities (2◦ , 4◦ , and 6◦ ), and two hemifields (left and right).
These data were modeled separately for each experiment using linear
mixed effect regression as implemented in the lme4 R package (Bates,
et al., 2014). The structure of the model included fixed effects for Ec­
centricity, Hemifield, and Stimulus, and all possible interactions be­
tween these three variables. Hemifield and Stimulus were effect coded
4

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

(i.e., − 0.5 and 0.5 for left vs. right; − 0.5 and 0.5 for upright letters vs.
inverted letters or Gabor patches). Eccentricity was coded as a contin­
uous variable centered at the intermediate eccentricity (i.e., 2◦ , 4◦ , and
6◦ were coded as − 0.5, 0, and 0.5, respectively). The random effect
structure included random intercepts for Subject, as well as by-subject
random slopes for the effect of each of the fixed effects. In other
words, the model did not assume that the slopes were identical across
participants. As specified in the preregistration, the random slopes for
the interactions between the fixed effects were dropped from all models
to allow them to converge. Significance for each effect was tested with a
Type 3 Wald chi-square test using Satterthwaite’s method through the
lmerTest package (Kuznetsova, Brockhoff, & Christensen, 2017). These
tests were preregistered and used uncorrected p values with an alpha
of.05. Beta weights and standard errors are also reported from the
models; their units being spacing as a ratio of the target’s eccentricity
(φ). Note that because the models were effect-coded, the model beta
coefficients for the effects are directly interpretable as the predicted
difference in scaled crowding distance due to that effect over the average
of the other variables. For Hemifield, this would be the average change
in φ for locations in the right hemifield compared to the left; for Stim­
ulus, this would be the average change in φ for inverted letters or Gabor
patches compared to upright letters; Eccentricity, this would be the
average change in φ for the 6◦ eccentricity compared to the 2◦ eccen­
tricity location.
To aid the interpretation of interaction effects, follow-up analyses
were conducted by fitting the same model separately for each stimulus
type without the fixed or random effects of Stimulus. Additionally, a
follow up model was fit to compare the inverted letters from Study 1a
with the Gabor patches in Study 1b. This model had the same structure
as the main models, but without random slopes for Stimulus (because
Stimulus was a between-subjects variable for this analysis). Full model
outputs for the main and follow up models are available in the supple­
mentary materials. The supplementary materials also contain alterna­
tive versions of the models from Study 1, which use dummy-coded
factors, test interactions from the unified model, and include estimated
marginal means for each condition. These models have identical pat­
terns of significance to the models reported in the manuscript, but may
be useful to researchers extract the crowding distances for each condi­
tion in the model.

When an error is made during a crowding task, participants often
report the identity of a flanker. This is known as a substitution error or
source confusion. The present study was not designed to analyze sub­
stitution errors, but for the curious reader, an exploratory analysis of the
substitution errors from Study 1 is available in the supplementary
materials.
Results and discussion
Study 1a: Upright versus inverted letter crowding
Fig. 3a shows the mean eccentricity-scaled crowding thresholds for
each cell of Study 1a. For upright letters, mean crowding distances
ranged from about 0.27φ at the 2◦ eccentricities to about 0.43φ at the 6◦
left location. Inverted letters had a smaller range in crowding distances,
with a mean crowding distance of about 0.43φ at the 2◦ left location and
a distance of about 0.56φ at the 6◦ left location. The intercept of the
model for Study 1a was 0.417φ, indicating the grand mean of the
crowding distances across all conditions. The crowding threshold was on
average 0.154φ lower for upright letters than for inverted letters across
the locations tested (β = 0.154, SE = 0.009, p < 0.001). Thus, although
the upright and inverted letters were essentially identical in terms of
their visual properties, the upright letters could be identified at 82 %
accuracy with closer spacing than the inverted letters. This provides
evidence for an effect of experience on the distance at which flanking
objects disrupt the identification of a target object, which is perhaps the
most important characteristic of crowding.
Crowding thresholds were lower when the target was closer to fix­
ation than when the target was farther away (β = 0.113, SE = 0.011, p <
0.001), with an increase of crowding distance of 0.113φ from the 2◦
eccentricity locations compared to the 6◦ eccentricity locations. Note
that this is despite the fact that these distances were already were scaled
to be proportional to the eccentricity. The eccentricity effect was steeper
by 0.058φ for the upright letters compared to the inverted letters, cor­
responding to a significant Stimulus x Eccentricity interaction (β =
− 0.058, SE = 0.016, p < 0.001). Thus, the eccentricity function of
crowding—perhaps the second most important characteristic of crow­
ding—also differed between highly familiar upright letters and less
familiar inverted letters.
We decomposed the Stimulus × Eccentricity interaction by testing

Fig. 3. Mean eccentricity-scaled thresholds for each location and familiarity condition, comparing upright and inverted letters in Study 1a (a) or upright letters and
Gabor patches in Study 1b (b). Error bars show ± 1 SEM. Dots show single-participant thresholds. Note that a perfectly linear relationship between eccentricity and
crowding threshold would lead to a flat function over eccentricities (e.g., all values ~ 0.5φ).
5

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

the eccentricity effect separately for upright letters and for inverted
letters. The Eccentricity effect was significant for both upright letters (β
= 0.142, SE = 0.014, p < 0.001) and inverted letters (β = 0.083, SE =
0.011, p < 0.001) when they were analyzed separately. Thus, even
though the eccentricity effect was greater for upright than inverted
letters, the eccentricity-scaled thresholds increased with eccentricity for
both stimulus types. This is a violation of Bouma’s law, which specifies
that the eccentricity-scaled threshold should be constant (i.e., that the
absolute threshold should be a constant proportion of the eccentricity).
As illustrated in Fig. 3a, crowding thresholds were 0.036φ smaller for
targets to the right of fixation than to the left (β = − 0.036, SE = 0.012, p
= 0.005). This was predicted because experienced readers of Latin
scripts regularly sample letter information to the right of fixation prior
to each saccade. However, the Stimulus × Hemifield interaction was
near zero and not statistically significant (β = − 0.008, SE = 0.013, p =
0.564), suggesting a general advantage for the right visual field rather
than a specific rightward bias for upright letters.

Study 2: Individual differences in visual crowding
In Study 1, we found several effects consistent with the hypothesis
that reading experience leads to changes in the effects of visual crowd­
ing. Most importantly, crowding thresholds were lower for upright let­
ters than for inverted letters. In addition, whereas Gabor patches
followed Bouma’s law, with no change in eccentricity-scaled thresholds
across eccentricities, these thresholds were reduced near fixation for
letters, and more so for upright than inverted letters. This eccentricity
effect fits with the fact that reading is primarily performed at or near
fixation. Finally, crowding was reduced in the right visual field (for all
stimulus types), matching the fact that information from the right visual
field plays an important role in guiding saccades during the reading of
languages that use the Latin script. Although the reduced crowding ef­
fects in the right visual field for all stimulus types may not necessarily be
attributed to reading experience, the differences between upright and
inverted letters in overall thresholds and eccentricity effects were almost
certainly a result of reading experience given that inverted letters are
almost identical to upright letters in every property other than experi­
ence. In Study 2, we aimed to provide additional evidence that crowding
for upright letters is related to reading experience, using a large-N in­
dividual-differences approach. Specifically, we asked whether intersubject variability in reading experience (as assessed by two proxy
measures) is associated with the putative reading-related properties of
crowding that we observed for upright letters in Study 1 (reduced
thresholds, a drop in eccentricity-scaled thresholds near fixation, and a
right hemifield advantage). Our primary proxy measure—the Andrews
spelling test—quantifies the ability to recognize misspelled words and is
thought to reflect the quality or precision of word representations,
which are developed through reading practice (Andrews, Veldre, &
Clarke, 2020). Our secondary proxy—the author recognition
task—quantifies the number of author names that an individual recog­
nizes, which is an indirect measure of lifetime reading experience
(Acheson, Wells, & MacDonald, 2008). We predicted that individuals
who scored higher on these tests would have decreased crowding
thresholds, especially for locations closer to fixation and locations in the
right visual field.
Although we found an equivalent right hemisphere advantage in
Study 1 for upright letters, inverted letters, and Gabor patches, this ef­
fect might still be a consequence of reading experience. For example,
massive experience with left-to-right reading might cause general
changes in attention that impact all stimuli and not just letters. If so,
then we would expect that the magnitude of the right hemisphere
advantage would be correlated with our proxies for reading experience
in Study 2.
Additionally, in Study 2 we measured visual working memory ca­
pacity with a change localization task that provides a sensitive and
reliable measure of general visual and cognitive ability (Johnson et al.,
2013). This allowed us to assess the possibility that the relationship
between our reading experience measures and crowding reflects some
broader aspect of visual cognition rather than being specific to reading.

Study 1b: Upright letter versus Gabor patch crowding
Fig. 3b shows the mean eccentricity-scaled crowding thresholds for
each cell of Study 1b. For upright letters, mean crowding distances
ranged from about 0.28φ at the 2◦ right location to about 0.52φ at the 6◦
left location. Gabor patches had a smaller range, with the lowest mean
crowding distance of about 0.51φ at the 4◦ right location and a distance
of about 0.61φ at the 6◦ left location. The overall intercept of the model
for Study 1b was 0.481φ. Upright letters had overall crowding thresh­
olds 0.183φ lower than Gabor patches (β = 0.183, SE = 0.016, p <
0.001). This provides additional evidence that the visual system can
tolerate closer spacing for familiar upright letters than for other stimuli.
At this point, however, we cannot determine whether the difference
between letters and Gabor patches reflects an effect of experience or an
effect of other differences in stimulus properties. We also compared the
data from the inverted letters from Study 1a with the data from the
Gabor patches from Study 1b. We found that thresholds were 0.079φ
lower for the inverted letters than for the Gabor patches (β = 0.079, SE =
0.022, p < 0.001).
As in Study 1a, eccentricity-scaled thresholds for upright letters in
Study 1b decreased substantially as target eccentricity decreased,
violating Bouma’s law. However, Gabor patches followed Bouma’s law,
exhibiting little or no effect of eccentricity on the eccentricity-scaled
thresholds. This pattern led to a significant Stimulus x Eccentricity
interaction (β = − 0.149, SE = 0.023, p < 0.001), with upright letters
showing 0.149φ more eccentricity scaling between the closest and
furthest eccentricities compared to Gabor patches. When analyzed
separately, the effect of Eccentricity was significant for letters (β =
0.165, SE = 0.016, p < 0.001) but not for Gabor patches (β = 0.016, SE =
0.018, p = 0.386).
Additionally, an across-experiment follow-up analysis indicated that
the effect of eccentricity was significantly greater for inverted letters
than for Gabor patches (Stimulus × Eccentricity interaction: β = − 0.067,
SE = 0.022, p = 0.002). In other words, Bouma’s Law was confirmed for
Gabor patches, but it was violated for inverted letters and violated even
more strongly for upright letters. These results mirror the pattern of
effects observed for the overall thresholds, with the largest eccentricity
effect for the upright letters, weaker eccentricity scaling for the inverted
letters, and no eccentricity scaling beyond Bouma’s law for the Gabor
patches. The violation of Bouma’s law for letters but not for Gabor
patches suggests a fundamental difference between Gabor patches and
letter-like stimuli in the nature or effects of crowding.
Finally, crowding thresholds were 0.088φ lower for targets in the
right visual field than for targets on the left (β = − 0.088, SE = 0.016, p
< 0.001). However, the interaction between Stimulus and Hemifield was
near zero and not significant (β = − 0.007, SE = 0.019, p = 0.691),
consistent with a general advantage for the right visual field.

Method
Participants
The original preregistered sampling plan had the same inclusion
criteria as in Study 1, including all individuals who were native and
current readers of any language using a Latin script. On the basis of a
power analysis using data from 115 participants in pilot study, we
preregistered a sample size of at least usable 200 participants, with data
collection continuing until the end of the spring 2022 term (see pre­
registration). This led to a sample of 267 usable subjects. However, we
later realized that our measures of reading experience—which are based
on English-language spelling ability and the recognition of Englishlanguage authors—were designed for native readers of English and
have not been validated for native readers of other languages. We
6

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

therefore limited inclusion to native and current readers of English (N =
250) and excluded 17 individuals who were native and current readers
of other languages that use a Latin script (primarily Spanish). This dif­
ference did not impact the statistical significance of any of the effects,
but it is nonetheless the more appropriate sampling method, so the an­
alyses provided here were limited to the 250 native readers of English.
Analyses of the full sample of 267 participants are provided in the
supplementary materials (see Table S18). All participants reported
having normal color vision, which was required due to our visual
working memory task which was a color change localization task
(described below). The average age of the 250 participants was 20.04
years (SD = 2.27). Additional demographic information can be found in
Table 1.

mouse to click on the changed disk. The colors of the disks were
randomly drawn from sets of approximately isoluminant colors, such
that the colors in a given array were roughly equally spaced from across
the color wheel. The color of the changed disk was 120 degrees on the
color wheel away from the original color. Participants completed 96
trials after experiencing 12 practice trials. The dependent measure for
this task was the number of trials with a correct response, which is
perfectly correlated with the traditional K measure of storage capacity
for this task (Johnson et al., 2013). For our sample of participants, the
median raw score for the visual working memory task was 48 (Mean =
48.66, SD = 10.88). The split-half reliability of this task in our sample of
participants was high (r = .80).
Spelling task
Our primary proxy for reading experience was the Andrews spelling
task, which measures a participant’s ability to identify misspelled words
and has been shown to have high test–retest reliability (r = .93; Andrews
& Hersch, 2010). Spelling ability is thought to represent the quality or
precision of a person’s lexical representations, which are learned
through experience (for a review see Andrews et al., 2020). We used an
updated version (Andrews et al., 2020). Participants were given a sheet
of paper with 88 words arranged in a grid. Half of the words were
misspelled, and the participant was instructed to circle these words. The
score was the number of circled misspelled words plus the number of uncircled correctly spelled words. For our sample of participants, the me­
dian raw score for the spelling task was 76 (Mean = 74.48, SD = 7.86).

Materials and procedure
All participants performed four tasks in a fixed order: a spelling task,
an author recognition task, a crowding task, and a visual working
memory task. The spelling and author recognition tasks were run first to
ensure that they would not be contaminated by an individual’s
perceived performance on the crowding task. The working memory task
was run last because it was considered secondary. In addition, it was
important to keep the order constant across participants to avoid adding
an uncontrolled source of variance among individuals.
Crowding task
The crowding task for Study 2 was identical to that for Study 1 except
as follows. Only familiar upright letters were used. The set of letters used
was the eight consonants on the middle row of a standard keyboard (S,
D, F, G, H, J, K, L). These letters were used because in Study 2, partic­
ipants responded by pressing the corresponding key on the keyboard
rather than reporting the perceived target using a mouse. These eight
letters allowed participants to easily keep their fingers on the response
keys. This approach yielded faster behavioral responses and allowed us
to replicate the pattern of letter crowding results from Study 1 with a
different set of letters. Because of the faster behavioral responses and the
reduced number of conditions in the crowding task for Study 2, we
observed in our pilot study that this version of the task could be
completed much faster. This allowed us to raise the number of trials for
each condition from 50 to 70, to further increase the precision of the
single-participant crowding thresholds. Consequently, the total number
of trials for the crowding task in Study 2 was 420. Participants
completed an 18-trial practice version of the task before completing the
actual experiment. A total of 42 catch trials were presented, including
seven trials at each of the six locations. As specified in the preregistra­
tion, participants were considered unusable if they missed more than
two of these 42 catch trials or if more than one of the six staircases ended
up at the maximal flanker distance. These exclusion criteria resulted in
39 subjects being categorized as unusable and therefore being replaced.
Individual staircases which were excluded for being near the maximum
value amounted to 0.6 % of staircases in Study 2.

Author recognition task
Our secondary proxy for reading experience was the author recogni­
tion task. This task is designed to quickly measure print exposure, based
on the assumption that people who have read more will be able to
recognize more authors (Stanovich & West, 1989). We used a version
from 2008 (Acheson, et al., 2008), in which 130 real and fake author
names were intermixed in a grid on a sheet of paper. Participants circled
all the names they recognized as being authors. Participants received
one point for each correct author circled and were penalized one point
for each non-author circled, meaning the maximum possible score was
65. Meta-analysis of studies using this task show it has good reliability
(Cronbach’s α = .75–.89; see Mol & Bus, 2011). However, note that this
task is not a very good measure for people who come from non-Western
backgrounds (McCarron & Kuperman, 2021), like many of the students
at the University of California, Davis. Consequently, we did not expect it
to be as good of an indicator of reading experience as the Andrews
spelling task. Further, it has also been found that this task may not be an
ideal measure for current college undergraduates, as the average score
among students is quite low (Moore & Gordon, 2015). For our sample of
participants, the median raw score for the author recognition task was 8
(Mean = 9.28, SD = 5.81).
Data analysis
The analysis strategy was patterned after that used in Study 1.
Crowding thresholds at each of the 6 locations were modeled with fixed
effects for Hemifield, Eccentricity, and the interaction between the two.
Additionally, and interacting with each of these effects, there were fixed
effects for the three individual difference measures –visual working
memory, spelling, and author recognition. Hence the highest order in­
teractions were 3-way interactions between Hemifield, Eccentricity, and
each of the 3 individual difference measures (as specified in the pre­
registration). Each of the individual difference measures was normalized
across the sample of subjects, putting all three measures onto the same
scale of z scores. In the present sample, the correlation between spelling
and author recognition was 0.328, the correlation between visual
working memory and spelling was 0.109, and the correlation between
visual working memory and author recognition was − 0.016. The
random effect structure included random intercepts for subjects and bysubject random slopes for Hemifield and Eccentricity. Significance

Visual working memory task
Visual working memory capacity was measured using a color change
localization task with a set size of 6 items, presented on the same video
monitor used for the crowding task. Change localization performance is
substantially more reliable than performance on the more common
change detection task (Kyllingsbaek & Bundesen, 2009; Zhao, Vogel, &
Awh, 2022), is strongly correlated with change detection performance
(Zhao et al., 2022), exhibits excellent test–retest reliability (Johnson
et al., 2013), and is strongly correlated with IQ and other measures of
overall cognitive ability (Johnson et al., 2013). For each trial in this task,
six colored disks (each with a radius of half a degree of visual angle)
appeared for 200 ms, equally spaced around a notional circle with an
eccentricity of 3◦ from a central fixation cross. After a retention period of
900 ms, the disks reappeared, with a disk at one randomly selected
location having changed color. The participants then used a computer
7

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

testing was identical to the models in Study 1. The full model output is
available in supplementary materials (see Table S17).
As with Study 1, an analysis of the substitution errors made in Study
2 and how their likelihood is predicted by scores on the individual dif­
ference measures is available in the supplementary materials.

= − 0.022, SE = 0.007, p = 0.003), with an increase of one SD in spelling
performance predicting a decrease of 0.022φ in crowding distance.
Fig. 5d shows that this effect was especially prominent when the target
was presented to the right of fixation, leading to a Spelling × Hemifield
interaction (β = − 0.018, SE = 0.008, p = 0.027). Thus, we found that
greater spelling ability—which is a proxy for reading experi­
ence—significantly predicted reduced overall crowding thresholds and a
greater right hemifield advantage. These results provide further evi­
dence for the hypothesis that greater reading experience is associated
with reduced crowding thresholds for letters, especially in areas of the
visual field where readers have the most experience recognizing crow­
ded letters. Note that performance on the spelling test had a numerically
larger impact for stimuli closer to fixation, but the interaction with Ec­
centricity was not significant (β = 0.010, SE = 0.007, p = 0.164). It is
possible the association between Spelling and Eccentricity would have
reached significance if we had included a broader range of eccentricities
or if we had tested an even larger sample of subjects.
As shown in Fig. 5b, performance on the author recognition task did
not predict overall crowding thresholds (β = 0.001, SE = 0.007, p =
0.904). However, there was a significant three-way interaction of
Author Recognition × Hemifield × Eccentricity (β = 0.031, SE = 0.012,
p = 0.013). As shown in Fig. 5e, this interaction appeared to reflect
increased scores on author recognition being associated with lower
crowding thresholds for targets specifically in the right hemifield and at
the nearest eccentricity. One reason for the limited effect of author
recognition may be that this measure was positively correlated with
spelling ability (r = .33 in our sample), and variance in crowding was
attributed to spelling ability. Consistent with this, when spelling was
removed from the model, the effect of author recognition increased
markedly (but was still focused on the locations immediately to the right
of fixation – see Fig. 5h).
To examine whether crowding thresholds are related to reading
experience per se or whether associations would be seen for any reliable
measure of cognitive ability, we assessed whether individual differences
in visual working memory performance showed the same pattern of
association with crowding thresholds. As illustrated in Fig. 5c, greater
visual working memory scores were associated with significantly lower
overall crowding thresholds (β = − 0.034, SE = 0.007, p < 0.001), with
an increase of one SD in visual working memory performance predicting
a decrease of 0.034φ in crowding distance. However, as shown in Fig. 5f,

Results and discussion
As shown in Fig. 4, mean crowding distances for letters in Study 2
ranged from about 0.28φ at the 2◦ right location to about 0.59φ at the 6◦
left location. The intercept of the model was 0.434φ, indicating the
grand mean of crowding distance across all locations, for an average
score on all individual difference measures. The eccentricity-scaled
crowding thresholds were significantly smaller when the targets were
closer to fixation (β = 0.211, SE = 0.007, p < 0.001), with crowding
distances for the 2◦ locations being 0.211φ lower than for the 6◦ loca­
tions. Crowding distances were also 0.099φ lower for targets to the right
of fixation than for targets to the left (β = − 0.099, SE = 0.008, p <
0.001). This replicates the pattern observed for upright letters in Study
1.
To visualize the correlations between crowding thresholds and the
individual difference measures, we plotted the estimated slope of the
relationship between eccentricity-scaled crowding thresholds and the
spelling task (Fig. 5a), the author recognition task (Fig. 5b), and the
visual working memory task (Fig. 5c), averaged over the 6 locations. A
negative slope indicates less crowding (a lower threshold) for people
with higher scores on these variables. To visualize the effect of each
individual difference measure over the 6 locations, we plotted the
model-predicted change in crowding threshold for an increase of one
standard deviation on the spelling task (Fig. 5d), the author recognition
task (Fig. 5e), and the visual working memory task (Fig. 5f), for each of
the 6 locations. In Fig. 5g-i, we also plotted these same model-predicted
changes for models fit on each individual difference measure separately.
These show the effects of each variable without controlling for the ef­
fects of the other individual difference variables, to aid in the inter­
pretation of the individual effects and give a sense of the degree of the
collinearity between variables. The results of these models had the same
pattern of significance as the main model.
Fig. 5a shows that higher scores on the spelling test were associated
with significantly lower crowding thresholds across the six locations (β

Fig. 4. Mean eccentricity-scaled thresholds for upright letters at each location in Study 2. Error bars show ± 1 SEM. Dots show single-participant thresholds. Note
that a perfectly linear relationship between eccentricity and crowding threshold would lead to a flat function over eccentricities (e.g. all values ~ 0.5φ).
8

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

Fig. 5. a-c. Relationship between average crowding threshold (over the 6 locations) and each of the individual difference measures (Spelling, Author recognition,
and Visual working memory). Dots are individual subjects, and the lines are simple linear regression fits. The shaded region shows the standard error of estimate for
the regression line at each point. d-f. Model-predicted change in crowding threshold for an increase of 1 standard deviation on each of the individual difference
measures, per location, in the full model (i.e., the effect of one variable after controlling for the other variables). g-i. Model-predicted change in crowding threshold
for an increase of 1 standard deviation on models fit with each of the individual difference measures separately. Error bars show ± 1 SEM.

the spatial pattern was the opposite of the effects of spelling ability.
Specifically, the visual working memory effects were larger to the left of
fixation (β = 0.020, SE = 0.008, p = 0.010) and larger at greater ec­
centricities (β = − 0.016, SE = 0.007, p = 0.024). Thus, although both
visual working memory performance and spelling performance were
associated with decreased crowding thresholds, each explained unique
variance and had a different spatial pattern, suggesting different un­
derlying mechanisms.

letters, which matches the fact that almost all reading is done with up­
right letters. Second, the effects of crowding on upright letters are
increasingly minimized for stimuli closer to fixation, which matches the
fact that reading puts high demands on the identification of tightly
spaced but highly similar stimuli near the fovea. Third, the visual system
can tolerate closer spacing of stimuli in the right visual field than in the
left visual field, which matches the fact that readers of Latin scripts make
extensive use of parafoveal information in the right visual field (Schotter
et al., 2012; Veldre & Andrews, 2016; Rayner et al., 2011). In addition,
people who scored higher on the Andrews spelling test—which appears
to reflect experience-driven changes in the precision of visual word
representations (Andrews et al., 2020)—could tolerate closer spacing for
upright letters, especially in the right visual field.
The differences in crowding effects between upright and inverted
letters were almost certainly caused by our participants’ massive expe­
rience with reading, and we would expect that most literate adults in
industrialized societies would exhibit similar effects. Although it is not

General discussion
Letters are tightly packed within words, and the reduction in
perceptibility produced by this crowding is a major limitation on
reading (Pelli et al., 2007). The present results demonstrate that the
human visual system minimizes the deleterious effects of crowding in
three ways that match the specific demands of reading. First, the visual
system can tolerate closer spacing for upright letters than for inverted
9

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

practical to experimentally manipulate experience at this scale in
humans, the observed differences in crowding between upright and
inverted letters would be difficult to explain by anything other than
differences in experience. That is, given that upright and inverted letters
are almost identical in terms of their physical properties, it is implau­
sible that people without experience reading the Latin script would show
different crowding patterns for upright and inverted letters from this
script. Thus, the results of Study 1 provide strong evidence that reading
experience leads to the ability to recognize upright letters well when
they are closely surrounded by other nearby letters. That is, reading
experience minimizes the deleterious effects of crowding on letter
perception.
Interestingly, Studies 1a and 1b indicated that the eccentricity profile
of crowding varies systematically across experience and/or stimulus
type. We found that Gabor patches obeyed Bouma’s Law (Pelli & Till­
man, 2008), which states that the critical distance for crowding remains
constant when expressed as a proportion of target eccentricity. This is
consistent with the few previous studies which have directly assessed the
crowding distance at multiple eccentricities for Gabor patches (e.g. Levi
& Carney, 2009). However, we found that Bouma’s Law was clearly
violated by letters, which yielded lower-than-expected thresholds near
fixation. This violation was stronger for upright letters than for inverted
letters, indicating that the deviation from Bouma’s law was at least
partly a result of experience. This finding does conflict with the
commonly held idea that the crowding distance for letters is a simple
linear function of the eccentricity of the target (Bouma, 1970; Pelli &
Tillman, 2008). Note that while the current study found that this was not
the case for horizontal letter crowding along the horizontal meridian in
the parafovea, our experiments did not test eccentricities beyond 6◦ . It
may be likely that Bouma’s law holds for letters beyond the parafovea
and in other spatial locations that are not as critical for reading.
Further research would be needed to determine whether the differ­
ences in overall crowding thresholds between letters and Gabor patches
are a result of experience or a result of the physical properties of the
stimuli. For instance, crowding distances for Gabor patches may be
greater compared to letters because they are visually simpler, because
they have higher target-distractor similarity, or because their features
are encoded along continuous dimensions (e.g. orientation). These dif­
ferences may to lead crowded arrays of Gabor patches being more
readily pooled or averaged within the receptive fields of neurons in early
visual cortex, which is indeed the primary mechanism in many models of
visual crowding (e.g. Levi, 2008, Pelli & Tillman, 2008). This may also
contribute to the more typical pattern of eccentricity scaling observed
for Gabor patch crowding compared to that of upright letters. Addi­
tionally, as discussed in the Methods section, more participants were
excluded for poor performance on Gabor patch catch trials than letter
trials, suggesting that the task for Study 1b was more challenging than
for Study 1a. This suggests that the Gabor patch stimuli may have been
inherently more difficult to encode or remember than the letter stimuli,
perhaps due in part to letters having verbal labels associated with them
(that are learned through experience).
However, the low-level similarity structure was highly controlled
between the upright and inverted letters used in Study 1a. Hence, the
difference in both crowding distance and eccentricity scaling we
observed between upright and inverted letters is strong evidence that
crowding is affected by experience. These results fit most naturally with
models of crowding that allow for crowding effects to arise from in­
teractions at multiple levels in the visual hierarchy (e.g., Manassi &
Whitney, 2018). One such model is the hierarchical sparse selection
model (Chaney, Fischer & Whitney, 2014) in which crowding for objects
is also a function of the receptive fields of the populations of neurons
that represent the object itself. This model predicts differences in
crowding across stimulus types, and accounts for other related results
such as the finding that upright faces are crowded more by other upright
faces than inverted ones (Louie, Bressler & Whitney, 2007). Under this
framework, the constraints of reading may spatially bias the tuning of

letter representations such that their receptive fields are smaller,
particularly closer to the fovea, causing letters to experience reduced
crowding. The finding that inverted letters also deviate from Bouma’s
law may indicate that some of this tuning may be occurring at the level
of letter features as well.
A very similar idea has also been put forward as the modified
receptive field hypothesis (Chanceaux & Grainger, 2012), in which the
receptive field properties of neurons involved in letter recognition are
modified by reading to reduce interference from neighboring letters and
optimize the parallel recognition of letters. It is important to note that
for both previous results of increased recognition accuracy for crowded
letters (e.g. Tydgat & Grainger, 2009) and the current finding of reduced
crowding thresholds for letters, it is unknown whether the fundamental
mechanism of crowding is altered for letters, or there is some other
process which allows for upright letters to be recognized under crowded
conditions. For example, if experience with upright letters simply makes
them more discriminable in the presence of noise, they may be more
easily perceived than inverted letter in the presence of noise from
flanking letters, resulting in reduced crowding thresholds.
Future research will be needed to distinguish the various possible
mechanisms for these effects. Indeed, they are not mutually exclusive,
and the mechanism or mechanisms of visual crowding are still not fully
understood (e.g. Manassi & Whitney, 2018). Whatever the underlying
mechanism, however, the present results show that crowding is func­
tionally reduced for upright letters and that Bouma’s law—which we
found to be true for Gabor patches—is far from an accurate description
of crowding for upright letters. This finding informs models of visual
crowding, and suggests that differences in stimulus classes, both in terms
of their physical characteristics as well as the observer’s experience with
the stimulus, should be taken into account. Further, these findings help
to characterize the extent of interference between letters as a function of
spacing over eccentricities and hemifield, which is informative for
models of reading – particularly for models which incorporate positional
letter representations that depend on their eccentricity and hemifield (e.
g. Snell, 2024).
Although conclusions about causation are more difficult for the
correlational approach used in Study 2, the observed association be­
tween spelling performance and crowding thresholds, particularly in the
right visual field, is at least consistent with the proposal that reading
experience alters letter crowding. Performance on the author recogni­
tion test was not significantly related to overall crowding thresholds,
although it was significantly associated with lower crowding thresholds
in the near-right parafovea, a key location for readers of Latin scripts.
Hence, this effect is also consistent with a role of reading experience on
sensitivity to crowding by nearby letters. These effects were not driven
by greater overall cognitive ability in people who scored higher on the
two reading experience scales, because a very different pattern of as­
sociations was observed for an independent measure of working mem­
ory capacity. While we suggest there is good reason to believe that
reading experience would cause changes in letter crowding effects, there
is also the possibility that the causal direction is flipped or mediated by a
third variable. That is, having lower crowding thresholds for letters
(perhaps due to some factor unrelated to reading) may lead people to
spend more time reading, leading to the correlations we observed. In
either case, these findings may be relevant to researchers who are
developing procedures for improving reading ability. That is, they
indicate that experienced readers have an advantage in the perception of
crowded letters, which presumably aids in their reading ability.
Conversely, inexperienced readers may face increased perceptual chal­
lenges because they are more susceptible to crowding. This suggests that
care should be taken to ensure that inexperienced readers are given
reading materials in which the letters are widely spaced.
We would like to stress that although our proxies for reading expe­
rience are widely used, they are far from perfect measures of actual
reading experience. Reading is a complex human activity that involves
the integration of many visual and cognitive skills. Spelling ability is
10

Journal of Memory and Language 145 (2025) 104689

K. Winsler and S.J. Luck

standard deviation of working memory capacity. Clearly, observers may
leverage visual working memory to retain target identity before
responding. However the fact that higher visual working memory ca­
pacity predicted lower crowding distances suggests that visual working
memory may be more directly involved in disambiguating between
target and flanker stimuli from crowded visual representations. This
effect is consistent with electrophysiological evidence that letter iden­
tification recruits working memory under conditions of close spacing
(Bacigalupo & Luck, 2015). Interestingly, we found that the spatial
pattern of effects for working memory were opposite from the spatial
pattern we observed for spelling, with visual working memory predict­
ing lower crowding distances particularly for locations further from
fixation and in the left visual field. This implies that there are distinct
mechanisms for the effects of reading experience and visual working
memory on crowding, and suggests that the intersection of visual
working memory and crowding may be a fruitful area for future
research. A recent letter crowding study with 50 observers (Kurzawski
et al., 2023) also found high variability across individuals, and lower
crowding thresholds in the right hemifield, similar to the present study.
Such results suggest that to explain the high variability in crowding
distances across observers and across the visual field, observer-level
characteristics must be taken into account. Our results suggest that in­
dividual differences related to reading experience and visual working
memory explain some of this variability.
The present evidence for experience-driven changes in the effects of
crowding on letter identification extends previous evidence for a high
degree of plasticity in the human visual system. Perceptual learning
within the visual system has been observed in a wide array of laboratory
tasks (Li, 2016), over longer term experience (Chopin, Bediou, &
Bavelier, 2019), and in instances of disordered vision (Castaldi, Lunghi
& Morrone, 2020). Other studies have shown effects of shorter-term
experience on crowding for letters (Chung, 2007; Hussain et al., 2012)
and on crowding for other learned, specialized visual stimulus classes
such as musical notes (Wong & Wong, 2016). The present findings
indicate that the effects of crowding are also influenced by a lifetime of
reading experience.

thought to index the quality or precision of visual word representations
which are learned through experience (Andrews et al., 2020). This is an
important skill for reading, but only one aspect of many. Author
recognition is thought to index time spent reading more generally
(Acheson et al., 2008). However, this measure likely does not fully
capture all types of reading, for instance time spent reading in many
online contexts or as subtitles in videos. An interesting avenue for future
research would be to obtain more measures of reading skill and expe­
rience and assess how they are associated with visual crowding. Another
interesting test of the effects of reading on crowding would be to
examine letter crowding for readers of languages with different scanning
patterns than English. On the basis of the current findings, we would
predict that experience reading right-to-left scripts (e.g., Arabic or He­
brew) might create a bias toward the left visual field instead of the right
visual field. Similarly, experience reading more complex logographic
scripts (e.g., Chinese)—where there is more information concentrated
within a fixation—may change the nature of the eccentricity scaling for
letter crowding.
We found smaller crowding thresholds in the right visual field than in
the left visual field in all three experiments. This effect was similar in
magnitude for upright letters, inverted letters, and Gabor patches, so it is
not clear whether this effect is related to reading experience. It could be
an experience-independent bias that is related to intrinsic differences
between the left and right hemispheres (e.g., Michael & Ojeda, 2005),
although interestingly, crowded letters in the left visual field benefit
more from attentional cues than crowded letters in the right visual field
(Ramamurthy et al., 2021). Another factor is that words are ultimately
processed in the left hemisphere, so letters in the right hemifield may
receive privileged processing (Yeatman & White, 2021). However, this
would not explain the fact that a right hemifield advantage was also
observed for Gabor patches.
Alternatively, experience with reading left-to-right scripts could
produce a generalized attentional bias for all stimulus types. This
alternative is consistent with the finding from Study 2 that the right
hemifield advantage was greater in people with higher scores on both
the spelling test and the author recognition test. Previous research shows
that readers have asymmetric perceptual span sizes biased towards their
reading direction, for instance to the right in English but to the left in
Hebrew (Pollatsek et al., 1981) or Urdu (Paterson et al., 2014). Further,
in English readers, increased spelling ability and reading comprehension
are associated with larger perceptual spans in the right visual field
(Veldre & Andrews, 2014). One possibility is that the development of
visual span and parafoveal processing during reading in children (Kwon,
Legge, & Dubbels, 2007) occurs in tandem with the development of
mechanisms to reduce crowding. One mechanism for reduced crowding
in the right visual field may be alterations in inward-outward asym­
metry, a characteristic of radial crowding where an outer flanker impairs
the recognition of target more than an inner flanker (Petrov, Popple &
McKee, 2007). Interestingly, it has been found that this asymmetry is
reduced in the right visual field compared to the left visual field,
potentially contributing to reduced overall crowding in the right visual
field (Chakravarthi et al., 2021). One explanation for this difference may
be related to the model of crowding put forth by Nandy and Tjan (2012),
where the tuning of lateral interaction zones outside of the fovea is
learned though spatial attention but biased by eye movements. Given
that English reading puts particular constraints on spatial attention and
eye movements that are focused in the right visual field, it is possible
that this learning process is a source of the general bias of lower
crowding distances in the right visual field.
The large sample size of 250 observers in Study 2—to our knowledge,
the largest sample in any crowding study published to date—made it
possible to demonstrate that crowding varies considerably across in­
dividuals and is associated with high-level factors such as spelling ability
and working memory capacity. The relationship was relatively strong
for working memory capacity, with the model suggesting an overall
decrease in crowding threshold of about.034φ for each increase of one

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kurt Winsler: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Project administration, Methodology, Inves­
tigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Steven J.
Luck: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation,
Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jml.2025.104689.
References
