Introduction
Imagine someone driving through a busy street to find a parking
spot. As they maneuver through the different roads, they keep checking
out for signs of a parking spot nearby. Suddenly, a loud noise auto­
matically catches their attention. Consequently, their foot is quickly
shifted from the gas pedal to the brake to be able to stop if the situation
demands so. As illustrated in this example, humans shape, influence, and
interact with the environment through their own actions (Kunde, Weller
& Pfister, 2018). In doing so, a set of diverse cognitive operations, such
as selective attention and working memory (WM), help us to successfully
adapt to the various demands of everyday situations.
In particular, the person in the example was exerting two types of
attentional selection: on the one hand, they were looking for the parking
signal voluntarily, differentiating the diverse signals, focusing on the
color, shape, etc., to complete the desired action with maximum effi­
ciency. This is commonly referred to as endogenous/voluntary attention
(Jonides, 1981; Corbetta, Patel & Shulman, 2008), and it is assumed to
be exerted in a top-down/goal-directed fashion (Chica, Bartolomeo, &

Lupiáñez, 2013). On the other hand, in parallel, just like the loud noise,
any salient stimuli in the environment will likely capture their attention
as well. This form of automatic and involuntary selective attention is
usually described as exogenous attention (Jonides, 1981; Posner &
Cohen, 1984), and it is characterized by its bottom-up/stimulus-driven
nature. Importantly, to achieve their goal of finding a parking spot,
the person in the example will additionally have to maintain certain
information about the environment available, like remembering the
directions she saw in a traffic sign. This is afforded by WM, commonly
defined as the ability to store, and manipulate information in an online
fashion independently of sensory stimulation (Baddeley, 1992; Souza &
Oberauer, 2016; Nobre & Stokes, 2020).
This example represents how the convergence of these cognitive
operations is critical in executing everyday actions, as well as many
other complex tasks. However, relative to research dedicated to exter­
nally directed attention for perception, research on internally directed
attention to WM contents remains less well understood (Awh, Jonides &
Reuter-Lorenz, 1998; Awh & Jonides, 2001) and has largely focused on
visual memories (Downing, 2000; de Fockert et al., 2001). Specifically,

* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: aguedafgt@ugr.es (Á. Fuentes-Guerra), fabianobotta@ugr.es (F. Botta), jlupiane@ugr.es (J. Lupiáñez), pedro_talavera@ugr.es (P. Talavera),
emartina@ugr.es (E. Martín-Arévalo), cgonzalez@ugr.es (C. González-García).
1
Equal contribution
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2024.104571
Received 11 January 2024; Received in revised form 12 September 2024; Accepted 12 September 2024
Available online 18 September 2024
0749-596X/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

Á. Fuentes-Guerra et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104571

several studies have evaluated the mechanisms underlying internal
attention (Kiyonaga & Egner, 2013; Myers, Stokes & Nobre, 2017; Nobre
& Stokes, 2020; Zokaei et al., 2019; van Ede, 2020; van Ede & Nobre,
2023; Huynh Cong & Kerzel, 2021), which refers to the selection and
modulation of internally generated information, such as the contents of
WM, long-term memory, task sets, or response selection (Chun, Golomb
& Turk-Browne, 2011). Essentially, these studies have primarily
assessed the effects of endogenous attention on visual WM contents
(Landman et al., 2003; Griffin & Nobre, 2003; Gazzaley & Nobre, 2012;
Rerko, Souza & Oberauer, 2014; Souza, Rerko & Oberauer, 2014, 2015;
Gunseli, van Moorselaar, Meeter, & Olivers, 2015; Gunseli et al., 2019).
In this line, these and other studies have provided important evidence
that retro-cues (i.e., cues presented between the offset of a memory array
and the onset of a probe) can select and prioritize visual WM contents
(Souza & Oberauer, 2016; Shepherdson, Oberauer & Souza, 2018;
Rerko, Souza & Oberauer, 2014), even with bottom-up (although pre­
dictive) retro-cues (Berryhill et al. 2012). In parallel, recent research in
the area of novel stimulus–response (S-R) associations has revealed that
endogenous attention can also affect how more complex memoranda,
such as planned actions, are represented in WM (González-García et al.,
2020; Formica, González-García & Brass, 2020; Formica et al., 2022;
Formica et al., 2023).
Conversely, exogenous attention studies have traditionally neglected
the role of WM representations, focusing primarily on the perceptual
spatial domain by implementing variations of the Posner (1980) clas­
sical cue-target orienting paradigm (see Chica et al., 2014, for a review).
Although it could be the case that WM contents are irrelevant to the
mechanisms of exogenous attention, recent evidence suggests otherwise.
For instance, it has been shown that some attentional costs (i.e., slower
reaction times (RTs) and/or lower accurate responses for uncued vs.
cued target locations) might be at least in part due to a disruption of
episodic cue-target integration processes (Spadaro, He, & Milliken,
2012) or by the encoding of the cue (Chen & Wyble, 2018; see also
Lupiáñez, Martín-Arévalo, and Chica, 2013). Moreover, some other
studies have shown that repetition of non-spatial attributes such as color
and shape can lead to attentional costs as well (Hu & Samuel, 2010; Hu,
Samuel, & Chan, 2011). More directly, several experiments point to a
systematic difference in the effects of endogenous and exogenous
attention on visuospatial WM contents (Botta et al., 2010; Botta &
Lupiáñez, 2014). In this regard, recent evidence suggests that symbolic
(central) non-predictive retro-cues can select visual WM contents (van
Ede, Board, and Nobre, 2020).
However, although this emerging evidence of exogenous attention
effects on WM contents has recently gained significance, it has largely
focused on visual memories of simple stimuli such as squares, circles,
bars, etc. (Hu & Samuel, 2010; Hu et al., 2011; Berryhill et al., 2012; van
Ede et al., 2020; Chao, Hsiao, & Huang, 2022). Nevertheless, real life
environments are more complex than that, and an infinite number of
stimuli of different nature catch our attention involuntarily on an
everyday basis. In this context, attention, memory and perception tend
to be intertwined with the main aim of executing behaviors (Hommel,
2019; Frings et al. 2020). In this context, studying whether fully exog­
enous (non-predictive and peripheral) cues can select WM representa­
tions that go beyond visual memories, such as S-R associations, is
essential and it would allow to better conceptualize exogenous attention
as a broader phenomenon, not just related to perceptual information.
Although untested, the hypothesis that exogenous cues should be
able to select complex WM contents such as S-R associations fits well
with recent theoretical frameworks of action control. The Binding and
Retrieval in Action Control framework (BRAC) put forward by Frings
and collaborators (2020) proposes that stimulus features, response,
environment, and its subsequent effects are integrated into a “mental
representation” in which all the elements related to that specific event
are included (Frings et al., 2020). Such mental representation is referred
to as an event file, as coined by Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, and
Prinz (2001); Hommel (2019) in his Theory of Event Coding (TEC).

Importantly, it is assumed that the latter repetition of any of these ele­
ments triggers the retrieval of the previous event-file as a whole,
comprising codes of the same features, which can impact current per­
formance (Frings et al., 2020). Thus, if we consider the BRAC and TEC
frameworks, when encoding some content in a retro-cueing paradigm,
the event file of a trial will contain all information pertaining that event
(e.g., stimulus, response, the encoding location, the laterality of the
response, task demands, etc.). If a spatial retro-cue, even if nonpredictive, later flashes on the location where the event was encoded,
then the entire event file should be retrieved.
Consequently, here, we aimed to address whether a purely exoge­
nous/automatic retro-cue could effectively select S-R representations
held in WM. We hypothesized that in an exogenous retro-cueing task
pertaining S-R associations, exogenous cueing would be able to retro­
spectively select content in WM, and this would be reflected as a facil­
itatory effect: faster and/or higher accurate responses in cued object vs.
uncued object trials. In the first two experiments, we tested this hy­
pothesis along a series of preregistered manipulations of the cue-target
onset asynchrony (CTOA), given its central role in the classical exoge­
nous cueing effects on perception (Gabay & Henik, 2010; Chica et al.,
2013; Martín-Arévalo, Botta, De Haro & Lupiáñez, 2021). In a third
experiment, we explored whether exogenous attention interacts simi­
larly with different elements of the event file or whether it prioritizes
spatial components. In all experiments, and, in line with our hypotheses,
we observed facilitation in cued object vs. uncued object trials, sug­
gesting that non-predictive/peripheral cues can automatically select
novel S-R associations held in WM.
Experiment 1A
Data availability
Raw data, experimental files and analyses’ scripts for this experiment
can be found at (https://osf.io/r8fks/?view_only=ca3358b6251b49d3
bc4aa558d4429175). The hypotheses and analysis plan were preregis­
tered prior to data collection and can be found at https://aspredicted.
org/blind.php?x=Z29_Y5K. Specifically, we hypothesized that exoge­
nous retro-cues would select and prioritize not only space, but also its
associated WM contents. This would be evidenced by faster and/or
higher accurate responses in cued object vs. uncued object trials.
Methods
Participants
Twenty-three naïve volunteers participated in this experiment (4
males, mean age of 21.1 years, SD=2.96). Sample size was determined apriori by a sequential Bayes Factor approach (see preregistration).2
Participants were recruited through the experiments’ website of the
Centro de Investigación Mente, Cerebro y Comportamiento (CIMCYC).
The prerequisites for participation in the present study were to be be­
tween 18 and 35 years old, normal, or corrected to normal vision, and to
give written consent. Moreover, participants were monetarily compen­
sated (5€ per half an hour) after completing their partaking. The
experiment was conducted in accordance with the ethical guidelines laid
down by the Department of Experimental Psychology, University of
Granada, in conformity with the ethical standards of the 1964 Decla­
ration of Helsinki (last update: Brazil, 2013). The experiment was part of
a larger research project approved by the University of Granada Ethical
Committee (1816/CEIH/2020).

2
Note that the final sample size deviated from the preregistered one due to
practical issues with the participants’ recruitment method. Nevertheless, 20
participants were enough (BF10 = 22.783).

2

Á. Fuentes-Guerra et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104571

Apparatus, stimuli, and procedure
We conducted the experiment on a computer with an Intel Core i73770 CPU @ 3.40 GHz x8 processor, connected to a 24 in. Benq
XL2411T monitor with a 1920x1080 (16:9) pixel resolution and 350 cd/
m2 of brightness. Participants sat at a viewing distance of approximately
65 cm. The presentation of stimuli and data acquisition were controlled
with PsychoPy 2021.2.3 throughout the whole experiment.
The experimental display consisted in the presentation of two
placeholders, one on each side of the fixation point, which was pre­
sented right in the middle of the screen (position [relative to the center]
of x = 0, y = 0). Each placeholder box had a size of 200 x 200 pixels, and
the border of the box comprised an extra 10 pixels. The left box was in
the position (x = -250 pixels, y = 75) and the right one in (x = 250, y =
75). Inside of each placeholder an image of 200 x 200 pixels appeared at
the beginning of each trial. These images of animate (non-human ani­
mals) and inanimate (vehicles and instruments) items were compiled
from different available databases (Brady et al., 2013, 2008; Brodeur
et al., 2014; Griffin, Holub, & Perona, 2022; Konkle et al., 2010),
creating a pool of 1550 unique pictures (770 animate items, 780 inan­
imate). To increase perceptual distinctiveness and facilitate recognition,
the background was removed from all images, items were centered in
the canvas, and images were converted to black and white. Additionally,
we created peripheral cues by increasing the outline of one of two
placeholder boxes from 10 to 30 pixels.
The experiment consisted of a choice-reaction task embedded in an
exogenous cueing paradigm, with a 500–700 CTOA, which has already
shown reliable exogenous cueing effects (Martín-Arévalo et al., 2013,
2016, 2021). The sequence of events in each trial is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Each trial began with the presentation of the encoding display, con­
taining the fixation point, two placeholders, and two novel images, for a
duration of 1000 ms. Participants were instructed to create two S-R

associations in which they had to associate each stimulus with a certain
bimanual response depending on its location on the screen. Specifically,
participants were instructed at the beginning of the experimental session
to associate stimuli to the left of the fixation point to bimanual index
finger responses, and stimuli to the right to bimanual middle finger re­
sponses. The location-response contingency was constant during the
experiment but counterbalanced across participants. Bimanual index
and middle responses were used to fully orthogonalize the location of
the stimulus on the screen with the associated response hand. Impor­
tantly, in each trial, the stimuli pair was completely novel, with stimuli
that would never repeat again throughout the experiment. Next, an in­
terval, composed by the two empty placeholders and the fixation point,
appeared for 500 ms (see Souza & Oberauer, 2016). Immediately after,
the peripheral non-predictive cue was presented for 50 ms in one of the
two possible locations with equal probability (50 %). This cue was
completely non-predictive of which of the two stimuli would be later
probed nor of the location of the target. After the peripheral cue had
disappeared, a fixation display was presented for a jittered duration of
450–650 ms. Then, a target image was displayed for 1200 ms in the
center of the screen without placeholder (x = 0, y = 75). Participants
were instructed to provide the associated response learned at the
encoding stage of the trial. Specifically, they had to simultaneously press
the “S” and “L” keys on the keyboard with both middle fingers if the
target was associated with middle fingers’ responses, and “D” and “K”
with both index fingers simultaneously if index fingers responses were
required. For the response to be considered correct, both key presses (“S”
and “L”; “D” and “K”) were required; if only one of them was pressed or if
it was a mixture of the two, the response was considered incorrect. RTs
from both fingers were collected, although only the fastest one was
selected for the analysis. In 15 % of trials, a completely new picture,
different from the two displayed in the encoding screen, and never seen

Fig. 1. Sequence of events in a given trial. Note. ISI: inter-stimulus interval. ITI: inter-trial interval. CTOA: cue-target onset asynchrony.
3

Á. Fuentes-Guerra et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104571

before, was shown as the target. In those cases, which we labeled “catch
trials”, participants were instructed to press the spacebar with their
thumbs. These trials were included to prevent participants from adopt­
ing strategies to reduce the WM load (e.g., encoding just the left item and
then treating the target as a go-no go task). The inter-trial interval, in
which the screen remained empty, lasted 1000–1500 ms.
Participants completed two runs of 161 trials each (137 regular, 24
catch). Therefore, the full experiment was composed of a total of 322
trials. In the middle of each run and between runs, participants could
take a break. Prior to the main task, participants performed a practice
phase with a similar task that did not include cues. This practice phase
consisted of one block of 16 trials (14 regular, 2 catch), which partici­
pants repeated until they achieved an accuracy of at least 85 %. The
images used in the practice phase were not used during the main task.
The total duration of the experiment was around 40 min.

Table 1
Descriptive statistics of Reaction Times (RTs) and Accuracy Scores for Experi­
ment 1A and 1B.

Experiment
1A
Experiment
1B

Cued
Object
Uncued
Object
Cued
Object
Uncued
Object

Reaction Times (RTs)

Accuracy Scores

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

712
ms
730
ms
714
ms
749
ms

81 ms

.87

.07

80 ms

.87

.1

106 ms

.86

.09

110 ms

.83

.08

intercept of participant and trial revealed that object cueing was not
statistically significant when considering accuracy scores [X^2(1,N=23)
= 0.133, p = .720] (See Table 1.).

Design
The experiment consisted of one within-participant factor with two
levels. Two dependent variables were measured: RTs and accuracy, and
one independent variable was manipulated throughout the experiment,
object cueing (manipulated within trials), with two levels: cued object
(the target was the object associated with the location where the cue
appeared) and uncued object (the target was the object associated with
the uncued location).

Discussion
This first experiment provided initial evidence that purely exogenous
non-predictive/peripheral retro-cues can automatically select S-R asso­
ciations held in WM. This was shown by faster responses in nonpredictive cued trials compared to uncued object trials. In line with
the TEC (Hommel, 2019), these results suggest that in our task, the event
file would encompass all the elements of the trial. Critically, when the
non-predictive cue is presented in one of the locations, the corre­
sponding event file would be updated with that information, thus acti­
vating the whole event file with all the content in WM.

Statistical analyses
To test our hypothesis, we performed a Generalized Linear Mixed
Model (GLMM) (see e.g., Lo & Andrews, 2015). The GLMM included the
factor object cueing as a fixed effect. The best structure for the random
component was obtained by comparing all possible models appearing
from the combination of the intercepts and slopes of object cueing, in the
random factors of participants and trial. The model with the smallest
Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) and Bayesian Information Criteria
(BIC) was chosen as the most suited model for our data. Within this
model, we performed the preregistered analysis of deviance on RTs since
it is the most sensible variable for studying exogenous cueing effects in
perception across the vast majority of studies (see e.g., Martín-Arévalo,
Chica, & Lupiáñez, 2013; Martín-Arévalo et al., 2016; 2021). Before
performing the analysis of deviance, trial rejection was conducted for
each participant by selecting only correct trials and by filtering out catch
trials. Lastly, p values in post-hoc comparisons were corrected with the
Holm-Bonferroni method. Importantly, the model selection process was
conducted independently of subsequent hypothesis testing. All data
processing and analyses were carried out with RStudio 2022.02.3 and
JASP 0.14.0.0. B. We also performed an additional equivalent explor­
atory analysis of accuracy scores since the effect of exogenous attention
is not so pronounced on accuracy scores, although it is usually consid­
ered in WM literature (see e.g., Souza & Oberauer, 2016; Shepherdson,
Oberauer & Souza, 2018; Rerko, Souza & Oberauer, 2014).

Experiment 1B
In Experiment 1B, we aimed at replicating and validating these re­
sults under a shorter CTOA (250–350 ms) to test whether, akin to the
perceptual domain, the exogenous cueing effects on WM contents would
be boosted (Chica et al., 2013; Martín-Arévalo et al., 2013).
Data availability
Raw data, experimental files and analyses’ scripts for this experiment
can be found at (https://osf.io/r8fks/?view_only=ca3358b6251b49d3
bc4aa558d4429175). This experiment was not preregistered.
Methods
The method was like Exp.1A except in the following:
Participants
A total new sample of twenty-one naïve volunteers participated in
this experiment (1 male, mean age of 20.7, SD=6.22). Sample size was
determined by a sequential Bayes Factor approach as in the previous
experiment.

Results
After comparing the 11 computed models, the best-suited model for
our data, which included the random intercept and slope of object
cueing in the random factors of participants and trial (AIC=72345;
BIC=72404) was selected, and an analysis of deviance was performed
within this GLMM. This analysis revealed a statistically significant dif­
ference between cued and uncued object trials on RTs [X^2(1, N=23) =
6.69, p = .01], with faster responses for cued (M=712 ms; SD=81 ms)
than uncued object trials (M=730 ms; SD=80 ms) (See Table 1. and
Fig. 2; cueing effect (uncued-cued object trials) = 18 ms; see Fig. 5, left
panel). In fact, the Bayesian scores obtained from the BIC index, pro­
vided strong evidence for this model (BF10 = 2.13e + 5).
Additionally, the selected glmm model for accuracy scores
(AIC=4781.8; BIC=4822.4, p < .001) which included the random

Apparatus, stimuli, and procedure
The task only varied in the implemented CTOA (250–350 ms instead
of 500–700 ms).
Results
After comparing the 11 computed models, the best-suited model for
our data, which included the random intercept and slope of object
cueing in the random factors of participants and trial (AIC=64121;
BIC=64179) was selected, and an analysis of deviance was performed
within this GLMM. This analysis revealed a statistically significant
4

Á. Fuentes-Guerra et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104571

Fig. 2. Effects of object cueing on Reaction Times (RTs) in Experiment 1A and 1B. Note. The maximum and minimum Reaction Times’ (RTs) values are represented
in the whiskers of the box plots. The Interquartile range (IQR) is displayed in the boxes by portraying the lower quartile, median and upper quartile. The half-violin
plots represent the distribution of RTs across conditions.

difference between cued and uncued object trials on RTs [X^2(1,N=21)
= 25.47, p < .01], with faster responses for cued trials (M=714 ms;
SD=106 ms) compared to uncued object trials (M=749 ms; SD=110 ms)
(See Table 1. and Fig. 2 and Fig. 5 (left panel); cueing effect (uncuedcued trials) = 35 ms). Just like in Experiment 1A, the Bayesian scores
obtained from the BIC index, provided strong evidence for this model
(BF10 = 1.84e + 4).
Moreover, selected glmm on accuracy scores (AIC=4855.4;
BIC=4888.8, p = .04) which included the random intercept of subject
revealed that the effect of object cueing was statistically significant [X^2
(1,N=21) = 15.29, p < 0.001] (See Table 1.), with higher accuracy
scores in cued (M=.86; SD=.09) vs. uncued object trials (M=.83;
SD=.08).
Lastly, in order to test our assumption of stronger exogenous cueing
effects with a shorter CTOA, we computed two exploratory repeated
measures ANOVAs combining the datasets from Experiment 1A and 1B.
In these analyses, object cueing was set as a within-participant factor
and experiment as a between-participant factor. The dependent vari­
ables were RTs and accuracy scores. Regarding RTs, the interaction
between object cueing and experiment didn’t reach significance [F
(2,44) = 3.86, p = .056], but there was a numerically higher difference
between cued and uncued trials in Experiment 1B than in Experiment 1A
(35 ms vs. 18 ms, respectively). Furthermore, this analysis revealed a
significant interaction between object cueing and experiment in accu­
racy scores [F(2,44) = 6.00, p = .019], with higher differences between
cued and uncued object trials in Experiment 1B than in Experiment 1A
(.03 vs..01, respectively).

learned to generalize the rule under which they had to encode the
stimuli; that is, the location and the corresponding response. Conse­
quently, the exogenous cue may just activate the motor rather than the
S-R association. Additionally, the weighting mechanisms assigned to the
different elements of the event file remained unexplored in these two
previous studies. According to the updated version of the TEC
(Memelink and Hommel, 2013; Hommel 2019), task demands affect the
processing of event files during the retrieval stage.
Hence, in our final experiment, we assessed whether exogenous retrocues interacted with all components of the event file (i.e., an object with
a specific color, at a specific location, to be responded to with a specific
response, etc.) equally or there were rather differences in the weights
associated with each component, while ensuring that stimuli were being
encoded and retrieved together with the response, namely, the S-R as­
sociation. Here, we manipulated task demands by asking participants to
respond based on location (as in previous experiments) or based on
another additional element, namely, color. We expected exogenous
prioritization of WM content independently of the task to be performed.
Still, the effect should be more pronounced when the location was a
relevant dimension of the task compared to other dimensions (like
color), showing a more nuanced effect when not relevant. This hy­
pothesis was based on the long empirical trajectory that associates
exogenous attention with the spatial domain (Posner, 1980; Lupiáñez
et al., 1997, 2013; Martín-Arévalo et al., 2013, 2016, 2021; Hu &
Samuel, 2010; Hu et al., 2011). This experiment used the same CTOA
(250–350 ms) as in Experiment 1B, given that results were stronger with
this setting.

Discussion

Experiment 2

This second complementary experiment replicated the previous
pattern of results under a shorter CTOA, providing further evidence that
exogenous cues can select automatically complex WM contents. This
experiment further revealed higher cueing effect as the CTOA is
reduced, in line with classical exogenous experiments in perception
where a facilitatory effect (i.e., faster RTs and/or higher accuracy for
cued vs. uncued trials) tends to be found at shorter CTOA (Chica et al.,
2013; Lupiáñez et al., 2013; Martín-Arévalo et al., 2013).
After carrying out the first two complementary studies, a few new
questions emerged. First, it could be argued that participants may have

In Experiment 2, we aimed at testing whether the presentation of a
spatial non-predictive retro-cue would activate and prioritize a repre­
sentation held in WM which was initially encoded according to a nonspatial feature (color). We expected to find faster RTs and/or more ac­
curate responses for cued object trials compared to uncued object trials
both when the binding was created based on the location, and similarly,
when it was created according to a non-spatial feature such as the color,
although with more pronounced effects for the former.

5

Á. Fuentes-Guerra et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104571

Data availability

were carried out with RStudio 2022.02.3 and JASP 0.14.0.0. B.

This study was preregistered (https://aspredicted.org/LV3_TL8) and
raw data, experimental files and analyses’ scripts can be found at
https://osf.io/r8fks/?
view_only=ca3358b6251b49d3bc4aa558d4429175.

Exploratory analyses
Similar to Experiment 1, we also performed additional exploratory
analyses regarding accuracy scores, and a hierarchical drift diffusion
model (HDDM; Wiecki et al., 2013).

Methods

Results
After comparing the 42 computed models, the best suited model for
our data was selected. This model included the random slope and
intercept of the interaction between object cueing and task in the
random factor participant and trial (AIC=73348.17; BIC=73514.19; p
< 0.001). Consequently, an analysis of deviance was performed within
this GLMM. Critically, this analysis revealed a significant main effect of
object cueing [X^2(1,N=21) = 19.18,p < .001] with faster responses in
cued (M=715 ms; SD=108 ms) compared to uncued object trials
(M=752 ms; SD=106 ms; cueing effect: uncued-cued trials = 36 ms; see
Fig. 5, left panel). In contrast, neither the main effect of task [X^2(1,
N=21) = 2.78,p = .096] nor the interaction between task and object
cueing were statistically significant [X^2(1,N=21) = 0.1499,p = .699]
(See Fig. 4).
Additionally, the selected glmm on accuracy scores, which included
the random intercept of participant and the random slope of task in the
factor participant with the interaction between object cueing and task as
fixed effects (AIC=5678.3; BIC=5732.8), revealed that both object
cueing [X^(1,21) = 19.18, p < .001] and task [X^2(1,21) = 9.04, p < .05]
were statistically significant, with higher accuracy scores in cued
(M=.86; SD=.07) than uncued object trials (M=.83; SD=.09), and
higher accuracy scores in location (M=.87; SD=.06) than color task
(M=.81; SD=.11). Further, the interaction between these factors was
also statistically significant [X^2(1,21) = 4.50, p = .03]. Post-hoc com­
parisons revealed a significant difference between cued and uncued
object trials only in the color task [X^2(1,21) = 4.43, p < .001] and a
statistically significant difference between the color task and the loca­
tion task only in uncued object trials [X^2(1,21) = -3.24, p = .02] (See
Fig. 6).

The method was similar to Exp.1B except in the following:
Participants
A new sample of twenty-one naïve volunteers participated in this
experiment (5 males, mean age of 22.4 years, SD=3.84). Sample size
was determined by a sequential Bayes Factor approach (see
preregistration).3
Design and Procedure
In this experiment, each participant performed two different sessions
(of 30 min each one). They were carried out on different days, with the
order of the sessions counterbalanced between participants. Each ses­
sion was composed of two runs of 92 trials each (80 regular, 12 catch),
giving a total of 184 trials per full session. Just like in the previous
experiment, participants underwent a 16 trials practice phase (14 reg­
ular, 2 catch) before performing the experiment, which participants
repeated until they achieved an accuracy of at least 85 %. Participants
were allowed to rest in between runs.
In one of the sessions, participants executed a choice-reaction task
very similar to the one in the previous experiments, but with an addi­
tional feature (i.e., color). In this experiment, the two lateralized stimuli
appeared either in an orange or green background (randomly assigned
and changed from trial to trial). Still, participants were instructed to
perform an S-R association based on the location of the stimuli, just like
in the previous experiments, and to ignore the color of the stimuli which
was effectively irrelevant. In contrast, during the other session, the same
task display was presented, but the instructions were altered. The S-R
associations, in this case, were defined according to the color of the
stimuli, not the location. Participants had to associate an image with a
specific background color (orange or green) to a certain response
(middle or index fingers; counterbalanced across participants), regard­
less of its position (See Fig. 3). Consequently, the design was a 2 withinparticipants factor with 2 levels: object cueing (target is the cued object
vs. uncued object, which changed trial-by-trial) x task (location relevant
vs. color relevant, which was manipulated between sessions).

Hierarchical Drift Diffusion Model
To disentangle the possible mechanisms underlying this difference
between tasks with the exact same cue, we carried out an exploratory
HDDM analysis of our data. HDDM treats two-alternative decisionmaking as a process of evidence accumulation towards one of two
decisional boundaries over time (Ratcliff & Rouder, 1998). It has the
advantage of considering the available data in its entirety, thus
retrieving parameters to fit both correct trials and errors RTs distribu­
tions. Crucially, such parameters can be mapped onto psychologically
meaningful processes, making it possible to infer which cognitive op­
erations are affected by the experimental manipulations. In its simplest
formulation, the decision process can be described by 4 parameters: the
drift rate (v), reflecting the pace and efficiency of evidence accumula­
tion; the non-decision time (t0), encompassing all cognitive processes not
directly associated with the decision itself, such as perceptual and motor
operations; the decision threshold (a), referring to the amount of evidence
required to reach a specific decision; and the starting point (z), indicating
whether there is a systematic bias towards one of the two options. The
HDDM is considered hierarchical insofar as it first uses data from all the
participants to estimate group-level mean parameters, and then it uses
these group-level priors to constrain the estimation of the participantspecific parameters. Consequently, it allows for more stable results,
even with fewer data per participant with respect to the traditionally
used algorithms (Lerche et al., 2017). Based on previous studies with
similar tasks (see e.g. Formica et al., 2024), we first established a cut-off
so that RTs below 200 were discarded. Moreover, the analysis was
performed only on regular (non-catch) trials. Finally, when estimating
the models, we used the HDDM command “p_outlier” to specify a

Statistical analyses
Preregistered analysis
To test our hypothesis, we performed a GLMM with the factor object
cueing and task as fixed effects. The best structure for the random
component was obtained by comparing all possible models appearing
from the combination of the intercepts and slopes of object cueing, in the
random factors of participants, trial, and session order. The model with
the smallest AIC and BIC was chosen as the most suited model for the
random component of the model. Afterwards, the fixed component was
obtained by comparing p values between the different models which
were achieved by altering the possible interactions between the inde­
pendent variables. Within the selected model, we performed an analysis
of deviance on RTs. Before performing the analysis of deviance, trial
rejection was conducted for each participant by selecting only correct
trials and by filtering out catch trials. All data processing and analyses
3
Note that the final sample size deviated from the preregistered one due to
practical issues with the participants’ recruitment method. Nevertheless, 20
participants were enough (BF10 = 12.227).

6

Á. Fuentes-Guerra et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104571

Fig. 3. Sequence of events in a given trial. Note. ITI: inter-trial interval. CTOA: cue-target onset asynchrony.

that relies on drift rate to model congruency effects (Ulrich et al., 2015;
White et al., 2018). In addition, Shepherdson and colleagues (2018)
showed an increase in drift rate and a reduction in non-decision time
when retro-cues benefit memory performance. Thus, if object cueing
and/or task impact drift rate, it would imply a decrease in the quality of
the evidence entering the decision process. In contrast, a modulation of
t0 would reflect a slowing in the non-decision phase that could
encompass perceptual, retrieval, and motor processes associated with
the decision (Formica et al., 2023).
We thus compared two models that differed on whether the
threshold parameter would also differ across tasks. Importantly, r-hats
values for both models were below 1.05 which is interpreted as adequate
convergence within each model (Makowski et al., 2019).
Model fitting was assessed based on the Deviance Information Cri­
terion (DIC), where lower values indicate better fit of the model to the
empirical data. In this case, the evidence for a difference in DIC between
two models was not strong (considering the traditional minimal differ­
ence of 5, see e.g. Cain & Zhang, 2019). Hence, we decided to go for the
simpler model (see Table 2.) and therefore, here we report the results of
such model.
After evaluating model fit, the best model was the one where both
object cueing and task were mapped onto drift rate and non-decision
time. Regarding drift rate, we found a main effect of object cueing (b
= -0.22, 95 % HDI=[-0.35, − 0.1], pd = 100 %) and task (b = -0.21, 95 %
HDI=[0.08, 0.34], pd = 100 %), suggesting that evidence accumulation
was faster in cued, compared to uncued object trials, and in the location,
compared to the color task. Interestingly, we also observed an object
cueing x task interaction in drift rate (b = -0.22, 95 % HDI=[-0.35,
− 0.1], pd = 100 %). This interaction revealed that participants accu­
mulated evidence faster in cued, compared to uncued object trials, when
performing the color task but not in the location task (See Fig. 7).

Fig. 4. Effects of object cueing and task on RTs. Note. The maximum and
minimum Reaction Times’ values are represented in the whiskers of the box
plots. The Interquartile range (IQR) is displayed in the boxes by portraying the
lower quartile, median and upper quartile. The half-violin plots represent the
distribution of RTs across conditions.

mixture model that assumes outliers come from a uniform distribution,
with a fixed probability of 0.05 (therefore, 5 % of trials would be
considered outliers). Estimating model parameter distributions within
the HDDM toolbox relies on a Markov-chain Monte Carlo sampling
procedure (Gamerman & Lopes, 2006). We used a chain with 10,000
samples; the first 1000 samples were discarded as burn-in, allowing the
sampling procedure to settle around a value after an initial more
exploratory sampling. To reduce autocorrelation in the retained sam­
ples, we additionally discarded every second sample.
We hypothesized our two independent variables (object cueing and
task) to impact both the rate of evidence accumulation (v) and/or the
non-decision time (t0). This rationale is partly based on recent literature
7

Á. Fuentes-Guerra et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104571

Fig. 5. Cueing effects on RTs on the full experimental set.Note. The maximum and minimum Reaction Times’ values are represented in the whiskers of the box plots.
The Interquartile range (IQR) is displayed in the boxes by portraying the lower quartile, median and upper quartile. The mean is represented as a black dot.

Fig. 6. Effects of object cueing and task on Accuracy Scores. Note. The maximum and minimum Accuracy Scores’ values are represented in the whiskers of the box
plots. The Interquartile range (IQR) is displayed in the boxes by portraying the lower quartile, median and upper quartile. The half-violin plots represent the dis­
tribution of Accuracy Scores across conditions.
Table 2
Model fitting between the two proposed drift diffusion models.
Model #

Object Cueing

Task

DIC

1
2

v, t0
v, t0

v, t0, a
v, t0

1656.96
1654.77

Note. v: drift rate; t0: non-decision time; a: decision threshold; DIC: Deviance
Information Criterion

When looking at non-decision time, we again found evidence for a
main effect of object cueing (b = 0.03, 95 % HDI=[0.02, 0.04], pd =
100 %). In contrast, the effect of task was not significant (b = 0.0006, 95
% HDI=[-0.01,0.01], pd = 56.3 %), suggesting faster encoding of sen­
sory information and/or execution of motor responses in cued compared
to uncued object trials, regardless of the task. Importantly, the interac­
tion between these two factors was significant (b = 0.04, 95 % HDI=
[0.02, 0.05], pd = 100 %), revealing a greater difference between cued
and uncued object trials during the location task, compared to the color
one (See Fig. 8).

Fig. 7. Drift rate of the object cueing factor in the two tasks.

predictive, peripheral retro-cue was able to automatically select and
prioritize complex representations held in WM, as shown by both in RTs
and accuracy scores. Moreover, in RTs, it also provided evidence that
this effect was maintained even when the task demands were altered and
the S-R association in retrieving was ensured. These results fit well with

Discussion
The second experiment showed once again that an exogenous non8

Á. Fuentes-Guerra et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104571

Nobre, 2003, 2012; Myers, Stokes & Nobre, 2017). Recent studies (e.g.,
van Ede et al., 2020) have reported converging evidence that not only
endogenous but also symbolic, central, non-predictive retro-cues can
select simple visual WM contents. Here, we extend previous findings by
showing that 1) purely exogenous/automatic lateralized cues can induce
similar facilitatory effects; 2) these effects go beyond visual WM and can
operate on complex and ecological stimuli that require the execution of
S-R associations. This result is especially important given that the ma­
jority of studies that are starting to conceptualize the automatic selec­
tion of WM contents through exogenous cues employ simple stimuli with
low ecological validity (see Hu & Samuel, 2010; Hu et al., 2011; Ber­
ryhill et al., 2012; van Ede et al., 2020; Chao, Hsiao, & Huang, 2022),
especially compared to real-world meaningful stimuli (Brady, Strömer,
& Alvarez, 2016; Brady & Störmer, 2020; Asp, Stömer, & Brady, 2021;
Chung, Brady, & Strömer, 2023). Hence, our results provide more
applied, further insight into conceptualizing the interaction between
pure exogenous attention and WM. A critical aspect here is that − as
neutral cues were not included − we cannot entirely rule out a potential
cost from uncued trials rather than a benefit from cued trials in our re­
sults. Future studies should properly disentangle between these two
possibilities.
We departed from Hommel’s (2019) conceptualization of event files
to understand the mechanisms under which exogenous attention can
automatically select space and its associated WM content. This idea of
feature binding in attentional selection is also shared by Manohar and
collaborators (2019) under a more biological perspective. These authors
propose that persistent neuronal activation serves as the focus of
attention that encodes recent activity patterns into synapses. Addition­
ally, rapid plasticity in flexibly-coding neurons allows features to be
bound together into objects, with an emergent property being that the
last item is maintained actively. Moreover, recent previously attended
items are preserved instead in synaptic traces, therefore, they are in a
non-privileged state but, importantly, can be reactivated by partial in­
formation (Manohar et al., 2019). In this regard, the Experiment 2
suggested that not all the same features of the event file have the same
weight, and that some might be more easily accessible by spatial retrocues than others (Memelink & Hommel, 2013). This idea is in line with
Chao, Hsiao, and Huang (2022), where task demands are thought to
modulate the binding processes. Particularly, they showed that
depending on the task context (i.e., a target detection task, a target
location task, or a target discrimination task) the binding between the
different features of the target could be modulated. In fact, only when
discrimination was required, there was clear evidence for the binding of
the form and other features of the target. In our case, the different eventfile features (i.e., location or color) tested in this experiment could be
used to select the associated WM representations. However, it should be
mentioned that in the color task, even though participants had to ignore
the location, the placeholders were lateralized and therefore, location
was never fully irrelevant, which can be critical when interpreting these
results. This is also in agreement with Hu and collaborators (2010;
2011), who highlight location as a key characteristic when considering
exogenous effects. In addition to task demands, CTOA manipulations
can also modulate exogenous effects, as it has been proven in exogenous
attention classical studies in perception (see Chica et al., 2014), where a
specific CTOA depending on the type of task (i.e., detection, discrimi­
nation, etc.) can reduce or increment the exogenous cueing effect.
Coherently, in our task (a choice-reaction/discrimination retro-cue
task), even though the cue matched something previously encoded into
working memory, the decrement in CTOA potentiated the exogenous
effect, increasing the differences in RTs and accuracy scores in cued
compared to uncued object trials. Another critical factor in our outcomes
could be the level of execution of the S-R associations, since there is
evidence that visual WM representations directly coupled to an action
plan render this stimulus more salient (Trentin, Slagter & Olivers, 2023).
In fact, these authors propose that visual WM is a fundamentally actionoriented cognitive operation, and their results support the notion that

Fig. 8. Non-decision time of the object cueing factor in the two tasks.

the conceptualization of event files (Hommel, 2019): the exogenous
retro-cue was able to interact with WM through space but also with other
non-spatial dimensions, such as color (Hu & Samuel, 2010). Addition­
ally, in accuracy scores, this experiment provided evidence for a sig­
nificant difference in task, with higher accuracy scores on the location
task compared to the color task, which supports previous findings that
stress the weight of the location dimension when studying exogenous
attention in perception (see Posner, 1980; Lupiáñez et al., 1997, 2013;
Martín-Arévalo et al., 2013, 2016, 2021; Hu & Samuel, 2010; Hu et al.,
2011). However, the accuracy difference between cued and uncued
object trials was only significant in the color task. On top of that, the
difference between the two tasks was only significant in uncued object
trials. These exploratory findings highlight the importance of consid­
ering task demands when evaluating exogenous effects on WM contents
and stress the fact that there are certain discrepancies in the different
dependent variables (RTs and accuracy scores). Consequently, more
sensitive complementary analyses like HDDM appear to show that the
cost attached to uncued object trials in the location task loads mainly in
non-decision time, while in the color task, it seems to be related to drift
rate. These results, in addition to evidence with mainly accuracy scores,
raise the intriguing possibility that, on the one hand, a ceiling effect
might be present on accuracy scores in the location task and on the
other, that the mechanisms through which exogenous attention interacts
with WM contents depend on the relevant characteristics through which
these contents have been encoded. Nevertheless, it is still difficult to
determine whether the different results are due to the relevance (the
spatial dimension was less relevant in the color task compared to the
location task) or to the specific feature by which the binding was coded
(color-R mapping vs. location-R mapping). Future studies will shed light
on this matter.
General Discussion
This research had a two-fold aim: first, it intended to test whether
pure exogenous attention as in perception can select and prioritize
complex WM contents by evaluating its implications in action control.
Additionally, it also aimed at assessing whether this effect is present
throughout different task settings with complex stimuli and demands.
This was achieved by implementing an exogenous retro-cueing paradigm
that capitalized on S-R associations held in WM, across two different
tasks.
In two experimental series, over three different experiments, we
observed a general facilitatory effect: faster RTs and/or more accurate
responses in retrieving from WM the content of cued compared to
uncued objects (see Souza & Oberauer, 2016; Shepherdson, Oberauer &
Souza, 2018; Rerko, Souza & Oberauer, 2014). These results constitute
initial evidence that pure exogenous attention interacts with S-R asso­
ciations held in WM, which aligns with previous literature (Gazzaley &
9

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104571

Á. Fuentes-Guerra et al.

attention is better conceived as an emergent property of the coupling of
motor to sensory representation. In this regard, for example, van Ede
and collaborators’ (2020) asked participants to move the mouse and
reproduce a certain orientation. Hence, future studies should address
whether the level of implication of the motor response could be a
modulator of pure exogenous effects on WM. Lastly, one potential lim­
itation is that our results could be explained just by stimulus activation
rather than S-R associations or due to long-term memories. Neverthe­
less, there are several reasons that lead us to believe that the response
component must be activated as well (i.e., the S-R association) and held
active in WM, which align well with the BRAC (Frings et al., 2020) and
the TEC (Hommel, 2019) theories: responses were orthogonalized to the
location in all three experiments, the association between space and
color was completely random in Experiment 2, the colors appeared in
any of the two locations from trial-to-trial, and including catch trials
force the active maintenance of both representations in WM with its
corresponding location, color, and response trial-to-trial. In any case, all
these aspects should be considered in future studies.
Furthermore, Experiment 2 also revealed certain differences between
the color and location tasks in RT and accuracy scores. Here, we used
HDDM to provide deeper insight into the possible mechanisms under­
lying these differences. This analysis hinted at the possibility of a dif­
ference in the mechanisms through which exogenous non-predictive
cues interact with the rest of the elements of the event file. Considering
the drift rate, in the color task, evidence accumulated faster for the cued
as compared to uncued object trials, whereas no differences were found
in the location task. The fact that drift rate was affected by the exoge­
nous non-predictive retro-cue is in line with the matched filter hypoth­
esis (Hayden & Gallant, 2013; Myers et al., 2015, Muhle-Karbe, Myers &
Stokes, 2021), which predicts that differences between cued and uncued
trials are primarily driven by a greater efficiency in extracting relevant
information for later decisions in cued trials. This hypothesis holds that
such benefit is afforded by selective attention shifts the tuning properties
of sensory and association neurons so that they more closely approxi­
mate the relevant stimulus. Regarding non-decision time, there was a
benefit associated with cued object trials, primarily in the location task.
This alteration in non-decision time in the location task could be
explained by a retrieval head start hypothesis (Souza & Oberauer,
2016). Essentially, according to this hypothesis, cues could act primarily
to reduce the time taken to access the relevant representation in memory
upon probe presentation, and in addition protect cued representations
from visual interference (Shepherdson, 2018).
Thus, although retro-cues affected both drift rate and non-decision
time (but differently as a function of the task set), our results raise the
possibility that the mechanisms through which exogenous attention
selects and prioritizes complex WM contents depend, at least in part, on
the hierarchical relevance of the dimensions that have been encoded.
This is also coherent with task-set modulations over the exogenous
cueing effect when using classical paradigms in perception (MartínArévalo et al., 2021). Altogether, this idea that attentional modulations
in WM are complex and possibly mediated by several processes and/or
mechanisms follows van Ede and Nobre’s (2023) proposal in which they
argue that internal selective attention can be driven by multiple sources,
can act on various representational targets, and can be mediated by
multiple stages and mechanisms to yield various consequences, high­
lighting the complexity and richness of this interaction. Furthermore,
these results also fall in line with recent studies evaluating S-R bindings
under different task sets (i.e., detection, localization, or discrimination
tasks), which provide evidence that binding effects are task-dependent
(Schöpper et al., 2020; Schöpper & Frings, 2022; 2023). Hence, future
studies should consider task demands as well as more fine-grained ap­
proaches such as HDDM in combination with neural signals or ocular
patterns. Both ocular patterns and brain oscillations have proven to be
informative in uncovering processes like covert spatial attention (see
Liu, Nobre & van Ede, 2022). In essence, by evaluating ocular move­
ments and/or neural oscillations, we could possibly disentangle the

mechanisms underlying exogenous attentional orientation (Balestrieri,
Michel, & Busch, 2022) and the selection and prioritization of WM
contents (Beste, Münchau & Frings, 2023).
Conclusion
The present study provides initial evidence that pure exogenous
attention can select and prioritize complex WM contents including S-R
associations. Moreover, it also shows that, besides space, exogenous
attention can interact with other dimensions of the S-R held in WM.
Importantly, our results suggest that exogenous attention might operate
on different dimensions of WM content through different mechanisms.
In sum, the obtained evidence challenges the classical conceptualiza­
tions of exogenous attention by opening the door to a more fine-grained
approach which posits that regardless of its automaticity, exogenous
attention might interact with complex WM contents in a more sophis­
ticated manner as it was initially thought. Essentially, the base of this
interaction might rely on the necessity of a flexible behavioral adapta­
tion to the changing demands of the environment.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Á. Fuentes-Guerra: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software,
Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing –
original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Project
administration. F. Botta: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Su­
pervision, Conceptualization. J. Lupiáñez: Writing – review & editing,
Validation, Supervision, Conceptualization. P. Talavera: Investigation.
E. Martín-Arévalo: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision,
Resources, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. C.
González-García: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision,
Software,
Resources,
Methodology,
Funding
acquisition,
Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
All the preregistrations, task design script, raw data and the scripts
for the statistical analyses are uploaded into an open repository which is
linked in the main text.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy, In­
dustry and Competitiveness [research project PID2020-116342GA-I00
to CGG and EMA, funded by MCIN/ AEI /10.13039/501100011033].
This work is part of the doctoral thesis of AFGT, under the supervision of
CGG and EMA.
References
