Introduction
Working memory refers to the cognitive function of maintaining
task-relevant information in a readily accessible state and manipulating
it according to current task demands (Baddeley, 1992). Its capacity is
highly limited and varies between people in important ways. For
example, deficiencies in working memory functioning have been asso­
ciated with various disorders such as learning disabilities (Swanson &
Siegel, 2011), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (Kasper et al.,
2012), and schizophrenia (Park & Holzman, 1992). Interestingly, indi­
vidual differences in working memory performance – more specifically,
visual working memory performance – have also been shown to correlate
with measures of fluid intelligence, the ability to reason, solve novel
problems, and adapt to new environments (Cattell, 1963; Horn, 1968;
Conway et al., 2002). Fluid intelligence is related to, but separable from,
crystallized intelligence, which reflects learned abilities, such as vocabu­
lary or general knowledge. Fluid and crystallized intelligence are usually
measured with a battery of diverse cognitive tests including tasks of
processing speed, attentional control, problem solving, and vocabulary

knowledge. The measure of general intelligence (– the factor g –) emerges
from the positive correlation among these tests, and is traditionally
thought of as reflecting a domain-general, core cognitive ability un­
derlying all of these tasks (Spearman, 1904; Jensen, 1998; Kovacs &
Conway, 2019; van der Maas et al., 2006) that can predict academic
achievement (Rohde & Thompson, 2007) and career success (Schmidt &
Hunter, 1998).
While a wealth of previous studies has demonstrated a strong rela­
tionship between visual working memory and fluid intelligence, many of
them have relied on simple, abstract stimuli to assess working memory
capacity, which may not fully reflect how visual working memory
operates in more ecologically valid contexts where we remember not
just abstract shapes, but meaningful objects that we can interact with
and have knowledge about. Thus, in this study, we investigate whether
individual differences in visual working memory for such meaningful
objects also correlate with fluid intelligence levels. This is an important
question because fluid intelligence is often linked to (and measured as)
abstract visual reasoning that does not interact with semantic knowl­
edge. Thus, it is unclear whether this abstract reasoning system

This article is part of a special issue entitled: ‘Individual differences in memory’ published in Journal of Memory and Language.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: yong.hoon.chung.gr@dartmouth.edu (Y.H. Chung).

☆

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2025.104648
Received 1 April 2024; Received in revised form 23 April 2025; Accepted 25 April 2025
Available online 17 May 2025
0749-596X/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/).

Y.H. Chung et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104648

underlying fluid intelligence would predict performance in a visual
working memory task that relies, at least in part, on prior conceptual and
semantic knowledge.

2001). However, in many ways, tasks using simple features or arbitrary
shapes are highly abstracted versions of how we interact with visual
information in the real world, where we see and memorize meaningful
objects: cups, tables, and people – stimuli that are not only much more
visually complex but also more meaningful and familiar to us. This
discrepancy creates a disconnect between how visual working memory
capacity is often measured in lab settings and the ways in which we use
this system in everyday vision. In fact, it has been suggested that using
simple artificial shapes might have resulted in chronically under­
estimating individuals’ working memory capacity (Brady et al., 2016;
Brady & Störmer, 2022), as using simple and abstract stimuli overlooks
our visual system’s ability to rapidly process and store conceptually rich
information (Potter, 1993). Consistent with this, recent studies found
that when participants are asked to maintain images of real-world ob­
jects over short periods of time, working memory performance is higher
relative to when maintaining simple low-level features, despite these
objects being visually more complex (e.g., Brady et al., 2016; Brady &
Störmer, 2022; Brady & Störmer, 2023; Thibeault et al., 2024; Torres
et al., 2024; for a review see Chung et al., 2024). The critical factor
underlying this working memory benefit appears to be that real-world
objects connect to pre-existing knowledge, as other work has shown
that increasing the visual complexity of objects alone actually results in
lower visual working memory performance (e.g., polygons or letters of
an unfamiliar language; Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2004; Luria et al., 2010).
Indeed, stimuli that are recognized as meaningful result in better
memory performance than stimuli that are not recognized as meaningful
even when these stimuli are roughly matched visually (Brady & Störmer,
2022). One study by Asp et al. (2021) showed that ambiguous stimuli
(Mooney images) were better remembered when they were recognized
as a human face compared to when they were only perceived as random
visual patterns, despite being physically identical. Thus, meaningful
stimuli recruit additional visual working memory capacity, presumably
because they allow the extraction and maintenance of more relevant
visual and semantic features (i.e., once the image is recognized as a face,
detailed visual features are meaningful as they can be interpreted in
terms of age, gender, and emotion, and not just abstract black and white
patterns).
Overall, these findings suggest that our ability to actively maintain
visual information is strongly dependent on the type of information that
is being remembered, and that establishing links between the to-beremembered objects and pre-existing conceptual knowledge may play
an important role in visual working memory processes. However, how
such perceptual-conceptual links in visual working memory relate to
measures of fluid intelligence that are usually assessed with highly ab­
stract visual reasoning tasks, remains an open question.

The relationship between visual working memory and fluid
intelligence
To investigate the relationship between working memory and fluid
intelligence, researchers have often used various span tasks that not only
require participants to maintain information for short periods of time,
but also to manipulate and process information in complex ways. For
example, participants are asked to remember a set of alphabet letters
while at the same time engaging in secondary tasks such as arithmetic
calculations (e.g., Unsworth & Engle, 2005; Conway et al., 2002; Engle
et al., 1999). Other studies have shown that fluid intelligence is also
correlated with performances in visual working memory tasks where
participants are asked to solely maintain visual information for a short
period of time, without additional complex manipulations (e.g., Fukuda
et al., 2010; Unsworth et al., 2014). This has led researchers to propose
that the mere capacity to store abstract visual information for short
periods of time also correlates with fluid intelligence. The function of
visual working memory is often described as maintaining visual conti­
nuity across eye movements in a visual scene, where perceptual dis­
ruptions – due to the saccade – require the visual system to perpetuate
inputs from one eye movement to the next (e.g., Cronin & Irwin, 2018;
Hollingworth et al., 2008). Thus, visual working memory is thought to
be deeply related to the eye movement system (van der Stigchel &
Hollingworth, 2018) and to be intricately connected to lower-level
perceptual processes (Scimeca et al., 2018; Adam et al., 2022). It is
traditionally studied using change-detection tasks, where participants
are asked to maintain an array of visual items over a short delay period
to then indicate which items they just saw in a test display (e.g., Luck &
Vogel, 1997). Using this task, several studies have found strong corre­
lations between performance on these relatively simple and low-level
visual working memory tasks and abstract reasoning skills, such as the
Raven’s matrices test, a standard measure of fluid intelligence (e.g.,
Cowan et al., 2005; Unsworth et al., 2014; Fukuda et al., 2010; Uns­
worth et al., 2015). While the exact nature of this relationship is still
under investigation, studies have suggested that working memory ca­
pacity may serve as an explanatory construct for abstract reasoning that
can account for a significant portion of variance in individuals’ intelli­
gence abilities (e.g., Oberauer et al., 2005; Kyllonen & Christal, 1990),
with some studies demonstrating a causal relationship between the two
(e.g., Hagemann et al., 2023).
Critical for the present work, to date, previous studies have mostly
used simple and abstract stimuli when measuring visual working
memory, such as colored squares or oriented lines. Thus, it is unknown
whether these correlations depend – at least to some extent – on the
visual materials being abstract, just like in the Raven’s matrices test, or
whether maintaining concrete and semantically meaningful stimuli in
working memory would also relate to fluid intelligence measures. This is
an important and timely question given the recently emerging evidence
that visual working memory capacity differs depending on what type of
information people are remembering and is increased for meaningful
and familiar objects (for a recent review, see Chung, Brady & Störmer,
2024).

The current study
Based on the recent evidence showing that meaningful stimuli, such
as real-world objects, are better maintained in visual working memory
than simple and meaningless shapes, we here ask: Does the previously
observed relationship between visual working memory capacity and
fluid intelligence extend to working memory tasks that use more com­
plex and meaningful real-world objects? On the one hand, it could be
that visual working memory tasks that use meaningful and abstract
stimuli share processes that relate to measures of fluid intelligence, in
which case a correlation should be present regardless of stimulus type.
On the other hand, given that visual working memory capacity for realworld objects is tied to conceptual knowledge and semantic meaning
(Asp et al., 2021; Brady et al., 2024; Chung et al., 2024; Wyble et al.,
2016), it is plausible that no clear relation emerges with measures of
fluid intelligence, which are thought to assess abstract visual reasoning
skills in particular – an aspect that is considered to be aligned with the
abstract nature of previous working memory tasks (e.g., Oberauer et al.,
2005). Therefore, it remains unclear whether performance in tasks using
real-world objects would tap into the same limits impacting the

Visual working memory capacity for real-world objects and
simple features
The vast majority of studies examining visual working memory
processes have conventionally used simple and/or abstract stimuli (e.g.,
Cowan et al., 2005; Fukuda et al., 2010; Unsworth et al., 2014; Uns­
worth et al., 2015; Duncan et al., 2012), mainly because the usage of
abstract stimuli can help isolate visual working memory from other
cognitive processes like chunking or passive forms of memory (Cowan,
2

Y.H. Chung et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104648

relationship between working memory tasks using simple stimuli and
fluid intelligence tests.
We here examined how visual working memory performances in
tasks using real-world objects relate to fluid intelligence scores assessed
via the Raven’s Advanced Matrices test (Raven et al., 1993), a wellvalidated and highly reliable metric for measuring people’s fluid intel­
ligence level (Raven, 2000). We hypothesized that if visual working
memory tasks with real-world objects strongly rely on passive long-term
storage that is governed by prior knowledge, it may reduce or replace
some of the abstract working memory processes used for simple features,
and thereby not correlate robustly with fluid intelligence scores. In
contrast, if involvement of conceptual knowledge does not reduce active
working memory processes related to fluid intelligence, individuals’
working memory performances with complex and meaningful stimuli
should correlate reliably with fluid intelligence scores. In addition, we
examined how visual working memory performances correlate with
measures of crystallized intelligence using scores from the C-Test, a test
that has been found to reliably capture language proficiency, one
important aspect of crystallized intelligence (Grothjahn et al., 2002;
Eckes & Grotjahn, 2006; Harsch & Hartig, 2016). We added the C-Test to
explore the possibility that working memory performance for real-world
objects is related to aspects of semantic or verbal knowledge, based on
the fact that these objects interact with pre-existing conceptual knowl­
edge. However, given that the memory task itself remains to be of visual
nature primarily, even if the meaningful and recognizable stimuli con­
nect to prior knowledge, we did not necessarily expect a strong relation
between real-world object working memory and the language-based
crystallized intelligence test. We did predict that working memory
performance for both colored circles and real-world objects would
correlate reliably with fluid intelligence scores, and that both tasks
would strongly correlate with one another. Our results were consistent
with these predictions, suggesting that visual working memory perfor­
mances for different types of stimuli share underlying processes related
to fluid intelligence.

of fluid intelligence and visual working memory that while variable,
hovered around a similar number on average (e.g., 100 participants in
Babic et al., 2019; 79 participants in Fukuda et al., 2010; 171 partici­
pants in Unsworth et al., 2014; 65 and 113 participants in Schubert
et al., 2023). Post-hoc power analyses based on the effect sizes reported
in the above-mentioned studies suggest that roughly 60–70 participants
would be needed to achieve a power of 0.80 for finding a reliable cor­
relation between visual working memory measures and fluid intelli­
gence. Thus, as the main goal of our study was to see whether visual
working memory for real-world objects correlates with fluid intelligence
scores, and not whether that correlation would differ for real-world
objects vs. simple features, we deemed 100 participants to be appro­
priate. We decided to use a slightly larger sample than the one suggested
by the power analysis given that these previous reports are based on
working memory tasks with simple stimuli and not real-world objects.
All experimental procedures were approved by the Committee for the
Protection of Human Subjects at Dartmouth College.
Stimuli and procedure.
This study was a within-subjects design where each participant was
exposed to all conditions. There were a total of 2 intelligence tests
(Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices and C-Test) and 3 working
memory tests, with the latter tests split into two parts: part 1 included
two conditions, the sequential visual working memory task for colored
circles and the sequential visual working memory task for real-world
objects; part 2 included the simultaneous visual working memory task
for colored circles with spatial locations (see below for more details).
The sequence of the fluid intelligence test, crystallized intelligence test,
and working memory tests was randomized per each study session. For
the sequential working memory tests, the block order of color visual
working memory task and object visual working memory task was
counterbalanced and was then always followed by the simultaneous
color visual working memory task with spatial locations (see below).
Each study session consisted of 1 to 9 participants at once (on
average about 5) in a designated study room. Participants completed the
intelligence tests on printed copies and the working memory tasks on
their individual laptops. During the study session, participants were not
allowed to converse or exchange answers in the testing room. Two
standardized 5-minute breaks were given between each test. Prior to the
study session, participants were asked to complete an online color
blindness test (colormax.org) and score over 10 out of 12 in order to
participate in the study. Any participant who did not score over 10 was
unable to participate. Upon arrival, participants completed a de­
mographics survey which asked for their age, academic year, gender,
current GPA, college entrance exam scores, and English language pro­
ficiency (see Supplementary Materials for details). Participants also
performed a selective ensemble perception task (Ortego & Störmer,
2024) as described in the pre-registration, to explore a potential rela­
tionship between a novel selective feature attention task developed by
our lab and fluid intelligence. This data is reported in the Supplementary
Materials.

Methods
The hypothesis, analysis plan, sample size, and exclusion criteria for
this study were pre-registered (https://osf.io/8bj6k). All data are
available online (https://osf.io/djg2b/). Statistical analyses were per­
formed in R (version 4.0.2) and R Studio (version 1.3.1093).
Participants
111 undergraduate students from Dartmouth College were recruited
to participate in the study in exchange for 1 class credit/hr. Data from six
participants were excluded due to prior exposure to either form of in­
telligence test. Data from one participant were excluded due to a laptop
malfunction during the test session, and data from one additional
participant were excluded due to failure to properly follow test in­
structions. No participant was excluded due to their overall d’ of visual
working memory tasks being lower than zero (chance level) or more
than 20 % of their trials being rejected (both a priori exclusion criteria
described in the pre-registration). Individual trials were excluded if
response times were shorter than 200 ms or longer than 5,000 ms. In
total, data from 103 participants were used in the main correlation
analysis between working memory tests and fluid intelligence (Mean
Age = 19.34, Age Range = [18–24], 69 Female, 34 Male; see Supple­
mentary Materials for more detail). For the C-Test data analysis, data
from 13 participants were excluded due to not having English as their
first language, and data from another 4 participants were excluded due
to not following the task instructions, resulting in 86 participants for this
analysis. Although the pre-registration specified 100 participants for the
main analysis, we intentionally overshot the number of participants in
recruitment to account for potential exclusions. The number of partici­
pants was guided by the precedent set in similar previous investigations

Sequential object & color visual working memory task
The object and color visual working memory task followed the same
general structure. On each trial, participants were presented with either
4 real-world objects or 4 colored circles. Stimuli (150 px in width and
150 px in height) were presented one at a time at the central location of
the screen for 200 ms each, with a 200 ms inter-stimulus-interval. We
adopted a sequential presentation of the stimuli to maximize perfor­
mance differences between these tasks, following recent studies showing
a larger real-world object benefit for sequential relative to simultaneous
stimulus presentation, possibly due to deeper processing of each stim­
ulus (Brady & Störmer, 2022; Chung et al., 2023a). After an 800-ms
delay, participants were presented with a two-alternative-forced3

Y.H. Chung et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104648

choice (2-AFC) test in the center of the screen with two different stim­
ulus choices: one matching one of the stimuli at encoding (target) and
one that was a novel foil. We used a 2-AFC task as usually done in our
lab, based on findings indicating that performance on this task correlates
well with other working memory performance measures (Schurgin et al.,
2020) and because it minimizes response biases as well as perceptual
confusions at test (Williams et al., 2022; Brady et al., 2023). Object
stimuli were selected from 540 images of real-world objects from Brady
et al. (2008). Object foils were chosen from the database to be maxi­
mally dissimilar from the target object determined by convolutional
neural networks (Brady & Störmer, 2023). This ensured that participants
could discriminate the target and foil stimulus similarly well across the
different stimulus sets, so that differences in memory performance
across stimulus types would not be due to differences in perceptual
discriminability between the targets and foils (for a longer discussion on
this, see Brady & Störmer, 2023). For the color memory condition, colors
were chosen from a CIE L*a*b* color wheel similar to prior works (e.g.,
Suchow et al., 2013; Schurgin et al., 2020) and were randomly selected
on each trial with the constraint that the to-be-remembered colors were
at least 30 degrees apart from each other. Concuring the selection of the
maximally dissimilar foil in the object condition, the foil color was also
selected to be maximally dissimilar – 180 degrees away on the color
wheel – from the target color and at least 30 degrees away from the other
to-be-remembered colors. Participants indicated which one of the two
options they had previously seen by pressing the left or right arrow key.
After each report participants were given visual feedback on their
answer. Each condition comprised 60 trials, for a total of 120 trials per
participant, distributed across four blocks of 30 trials each. Block order
was counterbalanced across participants. Prior to the experiment, par­
ticipants were given a short instructional video demonstrating the task.
See Fig. 1A and 1B for an illustration of the task design.

Simultaneous color visual working memory task with spatial locations
Previous research investigating correlations between simple feature
working memory (i.e., colored squares) performance and fluid intelli­
gence scores has frequently used simultaneous presentation during
memory encoding where all memory items are presented at once (e.g.,
Babic et al., 2019; Fukuda et al., 2010; but see Schubert et al., 2023 for
sequential spatial working memory). To allow for more direct compar­
isons with this previous work and the sequential design described above,
we included an additional visual working memory task using simulta­
neous presentation. The procedure was identical to the task above with
the following exceptions: on each trial 4 colored circles were simulta­
neously presented at locations evenly distributed around the center of
the screen for 800 ms. After a 800-ms delay, participants were presented
with a spatial cue indicating the location of the target item along with a
2-AFC with the target color and a foil color. Participants were instructed
to report which of the two colors they previously saw at the bolded
location by clicking the corresponding response probe. Colors were
chosen as in the sequential presentation described above. There were 60
trials in total. Prior to the experiment, participants were given a short
instructional video demonstrating the task. See Fig. 1C for illustration of
the task design.
Fluid intelligence test: raven’s advanced progressive matrices
Fluid intelligence was measured using the Raven’s Advanced Pro­
gressive Matrices (Raven et al., 1993), consistent with previous works
investigating the relationship between fluid intelligence and working
memory for color (e.g., Fukuda et al., 2010; Babic et al., 2019; Unsworth
et al., 2014; Unsworth et al., 2015; Schubert et al., 2023). The Raven’s
test involves abstract reasoning and problem solving, consisting of 36
problems that get increasingly difficult. Each problem features a three-

Fig. 1. Procedures for the visual working memory tasks. A) Sequential Color Working Memory Task: Four colored circles were presented sequentially (one item at a
time) in the center of the screen, followed by a short delay and a 2-AFC test in the center of the screen in which participants had to indicate which of two colors they
saw during encoding. B) Sequential Object Working Memory Task: The same procedure was repeated with real-world objects. C) Simultaneous Color Working
Memory Task with Spatial Locations: Four colored circles were presented simultaneously at four distinct locations on the screen, followed by a short delay and a 2AFC test with a spatial cue indicating the target location. Participants had to report which color they saw at the cued location. All image sizes are not to scale and are
for illustration purposes only.
4

Y.H. Chung et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104648

by-three matrix of geometric patterns with a missing piece. The task was
to determine the logical continuation for each set of three-by-three
matrices. Participants were instructed to complete as many problems
as possible within a 30-minute time frame, starting with a five-minute
practice test to familiarize themselves with the task format. See
Fig. 2A for an example problem from the practice test.

Crystallized intelligence test

Crystallized intelligence test: C-test

Correlation analysis

The C-Test is a test of general language proficiency. We used a
version of the C-Test from Keijzer (2007). Participants were given 5 texts
containing 20 word gaps where parts of the sentences had been omitted.
The task was to fill in the gaps with the correct word with the correct
lexical stem. The total duration of the test was 10 min. Prior to the main
test, participants completed a 2-minute practice C-Test. See Fig. 2B for
the practice C-Test.

Correlations among various cognitive and intelligence test perfor­
mances were tested by computing Pearson’s correlation coefficients. We
then tested significant differences between correlations using Fischer rto-z transformation. Although our pre-registration included estimating
the reliability of each measure using the Spearman-Brown correction,
this was not easily available for intelligence test scores as each test
question gets progressively harder, making it challenging to perform
split-half analysis.

Participants’ test scores were calculated by tallying the number of
correct responses out of a total of 100. Scores were coded following these
guidelines: Correct words, acceptable variants, and words with simple
spelling errors were coded as correct, while incorrect words, words with
grammatical errors, and blank responses were coded as incorrect.

Analysis

Results

Sequential object & color working memory tasks
To assess performance on the sequential visual working memory
tasks, d’ values were calculated separately for the 2 conditions for each
participant (objects vs. colors) as a measure of memory strength: (z[hits]
– z[false alarms])/√2. Due to the calculation of d’, perfect hit rates in
any condition were adjusted by applying (n – 0.5)/n where n is the
number of trials (Macmillan & Kaplan, 1985). The hit rates of four
participants were adjusted accordingly in the object working memory
task. These d’ values were then compared using a pairwise t-test. To
measure the reliability of the task performance, we used the SpearmanBrown reliability test, which involved splitting the data into even and
odd trials, calculating the correlation between these splits, and applying
the Spearman-Brown formula to estimate the reliability coefficient.

Sequential object & color working memory tasks
We first compared the visual working memory performances be­
tween the sequential object working memory task and sequential color
working memory task. We found that participants performed signifi­
cantly better in the real-world object working memory task (mean d’ =
2.10, standard deviation = 0.55) compared to the color working mem­
ory task (d’ = 1.28, standard deviation = 0.31; t(102) = 16.85, p <
0.001, Cohen’s dz = 1.72; see Fig. 3), replicating previous results (Brady
et al., 2016; Brady & Störmer, 2022; Brady & Störmer, 2023; Thibeault
et al., 2024; Torres et al., 2024). This effect was already robustly found
in the first few trials of the experiment, demonstrating that the differ­
ence in performances was not driven by a buildup of long-term inter­
ference due to stimulus repetition (see Supplementary Materials). The
Spearman-Brown split-half reliability analysis yielded a coefficient of
0.62 for the sequential object working memory task and 0.29 for the
sequential color working memory task, indicating that using real-world
objects resulted in relatively higher reliability than using colored circles
when sequentially presented.

Simultaneous color working memory task with spatial locations
To assess performance on the simultaneous visual working memory
task with spatial locations, d’ values for a 2AFC task were calculated for
each participant (see above). These values were then compared with
sequentially presented color and object working memory performances
using pairwise t-tests. The Spearman-Brown reliability test was used to
assess the reliability of the task performance.

Simultaneous color working memory task with spatial locations
Mean d’ for the simultaneous color working memory task with
spatial locations and a spatial cue at response was 1.15 with a standard
deviation of 0.59. We found that performance from the simultaneouspresentation color visual working memory task with spatial locations
was significantly lower compared to the sequentially presented object
working memory task (t(102) = 15.29, p < 0.001, Cohen’s dz = 1.66)
and sequential color working memory task (t(102) = 2.51, p = 0.01,
Cohen’s dz = 0.27). The Spearman-Brown reliability analysis yielded a
coefficient of 0.79 (see Fig. 3).

Fluid intelligence test
Participants’ test scores were calculated by tallying the number of
correct responses out of a total of 36.

Fluid intelligence and crystallized intelligence task
Overall, participants performed well in the Raven’s Advanced Pro­
gressive Matrices test with a mean score of 24.99 and standard deviation
of 5.04. For the C-Test, the mean score was 70.16 and the standard
deviation was 11.53. Note that we only included C-Test scores from
participants who reported English as their first language.
Visual working memory performances correlate with fluid intelligence
scores

Fig. 2. Practice examples of the Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices Test
(A) and C-Test (B). A) Participants determined the logical continuation of the
3X3 matrix by indicating the correct number (1–8). The example Raven’s test is
from the practice Raven’s test. B) Participants filled in the gaps with the correct
word. The C-Test example is from Norris (2018).

We found that sequential visual working memory performances for
both real-world objects and colored circles significantly correlated with
5

Y.H. Chung et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104648

Fig. 3. Results of the sequential visual working memory tasks for colored circles (red) vs. real-world objects (blue) along with the simultaneous color visual working
memory task with spatial locations (grey). Real-world objects resulted in better working memory performance than colored circles, replicating previous studies. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Raven’s task scores (real-world objects: r(101) = 0.38, p < 0.001;
colored circles: r(101) = 0.25, p = 0.01; see Fig. 4A). While the corre­
lation coefficient between working memory for real-world objects and
fluid intelligence scores was numerically higher than the correlation
between working memory for colors and fluid intelligence scores, a
comparison using Fisher’s R-to-Z transformation resulted in no signifi­
cant difference between the two correlations (Z = 1.34, p(two-tailed) =
0.18). Simultaneous color working memory with spatial locations also
significantly correlated with Raven’s task score (r(101) = 0.29, p =
0.003; see Fig. 5D).
We also examined whether the increase in working memory per­
formance for real-world objects relative to colors would correlate with
fluid intelligence scores. To do so, we computed the d’ difference be­
tween the sequential object and color memory tasks and correlated this
difference with the intelligence scores. Interestingly, we observed a
significant positive correlation (r(101) = 0.26, p = 0.007). Thus, in­
dividuals who showed a stronger object benefit also tended to have
higher fluid intelligence test scores. No such correlation was found with
C-Test scores (r(101) = 0.01, p = 0.89).
The C-Test score did not significantly correlate with sequential
working memory performance for either real-world objects (r(84) =
0.08, p = 0.44) or colored circles (r(84) = 0.17, p = 0.12; see Fig. 4B).

Comparison using Fischer R-to-Z transformation resulted in no signifi­
cant difference between the two correlations (Z = 0.79, p(two-tailed) =
0.42). There was also no correlation between simultaneous color
working memory with spatial locations and the C-Test (r(84) = 0.05, p
= 0.63; see Fig. 5E).
As expected, all three visual working memory measures were
significantly correlated with each other (sequential real-world objects
vs. sequential colored circles: r(101) = 0.46, p < 0.001; sequential realworld objects vs. simultaneous colored circles with spatial locations: r
(101) = 0.39, p < 0.001; sequential colored circles vs. simultaneous
colored circles with spatial locations: r(101) = 0.40, p < 0.001; see
Fig. 5A-C). We also found that Raven’s task scores significantly corre­
lated with C-Test scores (r(84) = 0.26, p = 0.02; see Fig. 5F). See Table 1
for a summary of all correlation results and Table 2 for summary sta­
tistics of measures from all tasks.
Discussion
Recent findings have shown that visual working memory perfor­
mance is reliably increased for meaningful real-world objects compared
to simple abstract shapes and features (Brady et al., 2016; Brady &
Störmer, 2022; Thibeault et al., 2024; Torres et al., 2024). Here we

Fig. 4. Relationship between sequential visual working memory tasks for objects and colors and the intelligence tests. Each dot represents one subject. A) Reliable
correlations were observed between individual scores on the Raven’s task and performances (d’) in both the sequential real-world object (blue) and color (red)
working memory tasks. B) No reliable correlations were observed between individual scores in the C-Test and performances (d’) in the sequential real-world object
(blue) and color (red) working memory tasks. Histogram plots illustrate the distribution of scores for both the x and y variables in each graph, representing the score
distributions of the respective tasks. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
6

Y.H. Chung et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104648

Fig. 5. Correlation plots across all other tasks. A) Sequential object working memory vs. sequential color working memory tasks. B) Sequential object working
memory vs. simultaneous color working memory task with spatial locations. C) Sequential color working memory vs. simultaneous color working memory with
spatial locations. D) Raven test vs. simultaneous color working memory task with spatial locations. E) C-Test vs. simultaneous color working memory with spatial
locations. F) C-Test vs. Raven test. All tasks showed significant correlations except between the working memory tasks and the C-Test.
Table 1
Summary of correlation analysis results. Values indicate correlation coefficients and asterisks indicate significance.

WM Objects
(Sequential)
WM Colors
(Sequential)
WM Colors
(Simultaneous)
Raven’s Test
C-Test

WM Objects
(Sequential)

WM Colors
(Sequential)

WM Colors
(Simultaneous)

Raven’s
Test

C-Test

X
​

​

​

​

0.46*

X
​

​

​

0.39*

0.40*

X
​

​

0.38*
0.08

0.25*
0.17

0.29*
0.05

X
0.26*
​

X

Table 2
Summary statistics of measures from all tasks.
Object WM (Sequential)
Color WM (Sequential)
Color WM (Simultaneous)
Raven’s Test
C-Test

Mean

SD

Range

Skewness

Kurtosis

Reliability

2.09
1.28
1.15

0.55
0.31
0.59

0.88–3.39
0.61–2.12
0–3.01

0.32
0.29
0.77

2.89
2.94
4.01

0.62
0.29
0.79

Mean

SD

Range

Skewness

Kurtosis

24.99
70.16

5.04
11.53

6–34
38–94

− 0.64
− 0.32

3.99
2.61

examined how such improved visual working memory performance is
related to fluid intelligence, the ability of abstract reasoning, which is
well known to be correlated with visual working memory performance
for simple and abstract stimuli. We hypothesized that if visual working
memory for real-world objects and colored circles share underlying
processes that are related to fluid intelligence, then performances on
both tasks should reliably correlate with fluid intelligence scores.
Conversely, if visual working memory performance for meaningful
stimuli relies on different processes, for example those that are related to
long-term semantic and verbal knowledge, then it may not correlate
robustly with fluid intelligence and potentially be related to measures of

crystallized intelligence instead. Our results show that individual dif­
ferences in visual working memory performances for both objects and
simple stimuli are reliably correlated with measures of fluid intelligence,
but not crystallized intelligence, regardless of stimulus type. Our find­
ings validate the previously established relationship between visual
working memory and fluid intelligence, and extend it to also encompass
more complex and meaningful stimuli. Overall, these findings suggest
that core active memory processes that are related to fluid intelligence
are similarly involved when maintaining simple features and real-world
objects in visual working memory.

7

Y.H. Chung et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104648

Visual working memory performance is correlated with fluid
intelligence level

rules (Salthouse & Pink, 2008; Wiley et al., 2011; Duncan et al., 2012),
potentially along with capacity itself (Unsworth et al., 2014). According
to these accounts, our results suggest that these additional processes that
are engaged during most working memory tasks are shared between
remembering real-world objects and colored circles. For instance,
although maintaining meaningful stimuli in visual working memory
may activate additional conceptual knowledge relative to when main­
taining abstract simple stimuli, the task still requires the same process­
ing steps such as separately encoding the items, binding them to correct
locations or sequences, protecting them against interference, actively
maintaining them over a short period of time, and correctly retrieving
the relevant memoranda at test. This perspective also aligns with pre­
vious findings that showed the involvement of similar active neural
engagement during visual working memory maintenance of abstract and
meaningful stimuli (Brady et al., 2016; Quirk et al., 2020; Asp et al.,
2021; Thibeault et al., 2024). Thus, whether conceptual knowledge is
involved or not, both working memory tasks are likely tapping into
qualitatively similar active maintenance processes.
Interestingly, although not statistically significant, performance in
the sequential working memory task for real-world objects showed a
numerically higher correlation coefficient with fluid intelligence scores
(r = 0.38) compared to performance in the sequential working memory
task for colors (r = 0.25). A post-hoc power analysis indicates that more
than twice as many participants would be required to find a reliable
difference in correlation strengths based on the current results. From a
theoretical perspective, it is not entirely clear why object working
memory performance would correlate more strongly with fluid intelli­
gence scores. Given the broad construct of fluid intelligence that in­
cludes multiple cognitive abilities, from abstract thinking to efficient
problem-solving, one possibility is that people with higher fluid intel­
ligence scores are also more effective at exploiting the benefits of realworld objects. In other words, people may differ in how they engage
with the stimuli in the working memory tasks, and people that perform
better on abstract visual reasoning tasks such as Raven’s matrices test
are also more effective in connecting object images to pre-existing
conceptual knowledge. This possibility is further supported by the fact
that individuals’ differences in performances between working memory
for real-world objects and colored circles correlated reliably with fluid
intelligence scores. This finding reflects that the extent to which an in­
dividual’s working memory capacity is increased for meaningful relative
to simple visual stimuli is related to their fluid intelligence level. Thus,
participants with higher fluid intelligence levels appear to derive more
benefit from meaningful stimuli in enhancing their visual working
memory performance. Future studies with larger sample sizes could test
this hypothesis more directly, for example by probing participants’
strategies and how they encode and process the objects.

Visual working memory has traditionally been studied using abstract
and simple stimuli, based on the premise that working memory operates
independently of semantic knowledge or conceptual structures
(Oberauer et al., 2005). Likewise, fluid intelligence comprises cognitive
abilities where no prior semantic knowledge is useful, such as abstract
figural reasoning, rather than concrete figural reasoning (Schulze et al.,
2005) or language (Woolgar et al., 2018). Consequently, many studies
investigating the relationship between visual working memory and fluid
intelligence have used abstract stimuli for working memory tasks
including arrays of colored circles (e.g., Fukuda et al., 2010; Unsworth
et al., 2015; Duncan et al., 2012), oriented lines (e.g., Unsworth et al.,
2015; Unsworth et al., 2014), random dot patterns (e.g., Schubert et al.,
2023; Dang et al., 2012; Haavisto & Lehto, 2005), or non-meaningful
shapes (e.g., Unsworth et al., 2014; Fukuda et al., 2010; Babic et al.,
2019). Thus, to date, it was not clear whether performance in a realworld object working memory task would also correlate with fluid in­
telligence scores. Given the involvement of concrete semantic knowl­
edge when using real objects, which could reduce some of the core
cognitive processes that are active in visual working memory tasks with
simple features, it was plausible that object memory performance would
not show a clear relation with fluid intelligence measures. Our results
clearly show that this was not the case, as we found a reliable correlation
between object working memory performance and fluid intelligence
scores, indicating that the cognitive abilities captured by fluid intelli­
gence tests are critical for actively maintaining real-world objects,
similar to simple shapes. This result aligns with prior studies in verbal
working memory that used stimuli like words in conceptual span tasks
and found a relationship between working memory performance and
fluid intelligence (e.g., Aizpurua & Koutstaal, 2010; Kane & Miyake,
2007). Our results extend this by showing that working memory for
highly visually complex and meaningful stimuli similarly exhibits a
strong and reliable relationship with fluid intelligence.
To further understand the implications of our findings, it is important
to address why working memory performance might be correlated with
fluid intelligence more generally. While the exact nature of the rela­
tionship is still under investigation, some previous research has argued
that the capacity limit of working memory, that is, the maximum
amount of information a person can actively maintain, is the most
critical factor underlying its relationship with fluid intelligence because
the more information one can store, the more information is available to
be used for abstract reasoning tasks (e.g., Carpenter et al., 1990; Fukuda
et al., 2010; Schubert et al., 2023). According to this view, our results
would suggest that there may be shared processes that give rise to visual
working memory capacities for real-world objects and colored circles,
despite performance being significantly better for real-world objects.
That is, the more information about colored circles a person can actively
maintain, the more information they can also maintain about real-world
objects. This is also supported by the correlation between the two
working memory tasks we observe in the present study. However, some
other research has challenged the view that these capacity limits per se
underlie the relation (e.g., Engle et al., 1999; Hagemann et al., 2023).
Specifically, some studies showed that questions on fluid intelligence
tests that are more cognitively demanding, and thus should require more
working memory storage to be solved, do not correlate more strongly
with working memory capacity (Salthouse & Pink, 2008; Burgoyne
et al., 2019; Wiley et al., 2011; Unsworth & Engle, 2005; but also see
Frischkorn & Oberauer, 2021; Smolen & Chuderski, 2015). Instead, it
has been suggested that other aspects of working memory tasks might be
the crucial factors driving the correlation between working memory
performance and fluid intelligence. These aspects include attentional
control processes (Draheim et al., 2022; Shipstead et al., 2016), flexible
binding of memoranda (Bateman & Birney, 2019), the usage of specific
encoding strategies (Babic et al., 2019), or the ability to adapt and apply

Reliability of sequential and simultaneous visual working
memory tasks
We also find that both sequential and simultaneous presentations of
stimuli at encoding during the color working memory tasks resulted in
significant correlations of similar magnitude with fluid intelligence and
with each other. This is consistent with a recent study by Zhao and Vogel
(2023) which found that individual differences in visual working
memory performance are highly correlated between sequential and
simultaneous presentations, demonstrating that both presentation for­
mats are adequate in assessing visual working memory capacity and its
relation to fluid intelligence. Interestingly, we observed that the visual
working memory task for colored circles with simultaneous presentation
resulted in the highest reliability score (0.79), followed by sequentially
presented real-world objects (0.62) and then sequentially presented
colored circles (0.29). Previous findings showed a greater benefit of
sequential presentation for meaningful stimuli compared to abstract
stimuli, as it allows for deeper semantic processing of each stimulus
(Brady & Störmer, 2022; Chung et al., 2023a). Our data show that when
8

Y.H. Chung et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104648

stimuli are presented sequentially, real-world objects also result in
higher reliability scores, comparable to the reliability level of simulta­
neous presentation of colored circles. In contrast, the reliability score for
the color working memory task with sequential presentation was un­
expectedly low. This outcome may stem from increased confusion or
interference when perceptually similar simple features (like colors) are
presented at the same location. This also aligns with previous findings
that show the important role of spatial locations as indexing features to
bind visual information in working memory (e.g., Schneegans & Bays,
2019; Swan & Wyble, 2014; Chen & Wyble, 2015; Tam & Wyble, 2022;
Chung, Tam, et al., 2024). While the sequential color working memory
task resulted in a low reliability score, which in turn makes it chal­
lenging to interpret correlation results using that specific task, we found
a similar correlation with the much more reliable simultaneous color
working memory task with spatial locations. Overall, this points to
potentially significant considerations when thinking about how working
memory capacity is measured. Future studies could systematically test
how different presentation types and stimulus classes interact with the
reliability of working memory tests.

recognized as meaningful do not exhibit such improvement in perfor­
mance (e.g., Asp et al., 2021; Chung et al., 2023b; Brady et al., 2016;
Brown & Wesley, 2013; Alvarez & Cavanagh, 2004; Olson & Jiang,
2002). Therefore, it is plausible that the visually derived ability to
recognize various objects, which is critical for the boost in working
memory for meaningful stimuli, may correlate with crystallized intelli­
gence test scores in a more visual domain (i.e., object recognition test).
Thus, future investigations could incorporate crystallized intelligence
tests that assess visual object recognition and also include images of
objects in the working memory tasks that vary in recognizability (i.e.,
how they connect to conceptual knowledge) and familiarity across
participants.
Limitation of the current study
One general caveat to consider in the current data is the potentially
selective range of participants. For instance, all participants were young
university students who generally scored highly on standardized tests
(see Supplementary Materials). Indeed, the average Raven’s test score
was around 25, which is higher than scores reported in previous studies
using a similar test to examine its relationship with working memory
performance. While such a restricted participant range may have
underestimated the correlations overall, we still found reliable correla­
tions between the Raven’s scores and all visual working memory mea­
sures. Importantly, this limitation in population would affect all
comparisons equally. In addition, intelligence test scores were not
largely skewed (− 0.64 for the Raven’s test scores and − 0.32 for the CTest scores). Nevertheless, future studies should consider testing a
broader and more diverse population for improved generalizability of
the results.

Crystallized intelligence is not reliably correlated with visual
working memory
We also tested whether visual working memory performances for
colored circles and real-world objects are related to crystallized intelli­
gence scores. While prior studies have found only weak relationships
between crystallized intelligence and working memory (e.g., Salthouse
& Pink, 2008; Buehner et al., 2006), especially when using abstract
stimuli (Haavisto & Lehto, 2005; Dang et al., 2012; Dang et al., 2014), it
seems plausible that working memory for real-world objects would have
shown a different pattern, given that recognizing and understanding
real-world objects relies on pre-existing semantic knowledge. However,
we found no evidence of a correlation between the C-Test scores and
working memory performances. It should be noted, however, that the CTest in particular measures crystallized intelligence through language
proficiency and it is unclear whether the C-Test accurately captures
individual differences in semantic knowledge used when remembering
real-world objects. Such verbal tests have been shown to correlate more
strongly with verbal working memory tasks rather than visuo-spatial
working memory tasks (Haavisto & Lehto, 2005; Dang et al., 2012;
Dang et al., 2014). Previous studies have shown that real-world objects
benefit visual working memory performance even when verbal strate­
gies are controlled for (e.g., Brady et al., 2016; Chung et al., 2023b;
Chung, Tam, et al., 2024; Starr et al., 2020). Additionally, a recent study
showed that simply providing verbal category labels to unrecognizable
shapes does not effectively enhance visual working memory perfor­
mance (Chung, Williams, et al., 2024). Thus, while verbal knowledge is
commonly associated with crystallized intelligence, it remains unclear
whether it would serve as a critical underlying factor of object working
memory performance. Furthermore, the current study used real-world
objects that are frequently encountered in everyday life and thus
likely do not vary substantially in their recognizability level or semantic
meaningfulness across individuals. Previous research has demonstrated
that not all objects are subject to the same amount of benefit in visual
working memory. For instance, unfamiliar objects that are not
commonly seen result in worse visual working memory performance
compared to highly familiar objects (Starr et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020).
Therefore, it is possible that variation in the familiarity or knowledge
about the objects in a working memory task would also be related to
individual differences in learned knowledge, and thus to some degree
crystallized intelligence.
Previous studies reporting the meaningfulness benefit in visual
working memory have argued that the benefit arises from the ability to
rapidly connect visual inputs to pre-existing conceptual knowledge
about what these objects are (Chung et al., 2024; Brady et al., 2024;
Wyble et al., 2016) because perceptually complex stimuli that are not

Summary
Our findings reveal a reliable correlation between individual differ­
ences in fluid intelligence and visual working memory performance for
both abstract simple features and real-world objects. Our results also add
to the emerging evidence that meaningful and familiar stimuli can
enhance visual working memory processes. Collectively, these findings
validate the use of real-world object stimuli to test visual working
memory and indicate that remembering complex, meaningful stimuli
and basic simple features share core cognitive processes that are related
to fluid intelligence.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yong Hoon Chung: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project admin­
istration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization. Kaira K. Shlipak: Writing – review & editing,
Visualization, Validation, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptuali­
zation. Viola S. Störmer: Writing – review & editing, Visualization,
Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Methdology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
Author KKS was supported by Dartmouth Women in Science
Program.
9

Y.H. Chung et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 143 (2025) 104648

Appendix A. Supplementary material

Cronin, D. A., & Irwin, D. E. (2018). Visual working memory supports perceptual stability
across saccadic eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 44(11), 1739.
Dang, C. P., Braeken, J., Colom, R., Ferrer, E., & Liu, C. (2014). Why is working memory
related to intelligence? Different contributions from storage and processing. Memory,
22(4), 426–441.
Dang, C. P., Braeken, J., Ferrer, E., & Liu, C. (2012). Unitary or non-unitary nature of
working memory? Evidence from its relation to general fluid and crystallized
intelligence. Intelligence, 40(5), 499–508.
Draheim, C., Pak, R., Draheim, A. A., & Engle, R. W. (2022). The role of attention control
in complex real-world tasks. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 29(4), 1143–1197.
Duncan, J., Schramm, M., Thompson, R., & Dumontheil, I. (2012). Task rules, working
memory, and fluid intelligence. Psychonomic Bulletin & review, 19, 864–870.
Eckes, T., & Grotjahn, R. (2006). A closer look at the construct validity of C-tests.
Language Testing, 23(3), 290–325.
Engle, R. W., Tuholski, S. W., Laughlin, J. E., & Conway, A. R. (1999). Working memory,
short-term memory, and general fluid intelligence: A latent-variable approach.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 128(3), 309.
Frischkorn, G. T., & Oberauer, K. (2021). Intelligence test items varying in capacity
demands cannot be used to test the causality of working memory capacity for fluid
intelligence. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 28(4), 1423–1432.
Fukuda, K., Vogel, E., Mayr, U., & Awh, E. (2010). Quantity, not quality: The relationship
between fluid intelligence and working memory capacity. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 17, 673–679.
Grothjahn, R., Klein-Braley, C., & Raatz, U. (2002). C-tests: An overview. In J. Coleman,
R. Grotjahn, & U. Raatz (Eds.), University language testing and the C-test (pp. 93114). Bochum, Germany: AKS-Verlag.
Haavisto, M. L., & Lehto, J. E. (2005). Fluid/spatial and crystallized intelligence in
relation to domain-specific working memory: A latent-variable approach. Learning
and Individual Differences, 15(1), 1–21.
Hagemann, D., Ihmels, M., Bast, N., Neubauer, A. B., Schankin, A., & Schubert, A. L.
(2023). Fluid intelligence is (much) more than working memory capacity: An
experimental analysis. Journal of Intelligence, 11(4), 70.
Harsch, C., & Hartig, J. (2016). Comparing C-tests and Yes/No vocabulary size tests as
predictors of receptive language skills. Language Testing, 33(4), 555–575.
Hollingworth, A., Richard, A. M., & Luck, S. J. (2008). Understanding the function of
visual short-term memory: Transsaccadic memory, object correspondence, and gaze
correction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137(1), 163.
Horn, J. L. (1968). Organization of abilities and the development of intelligence.
Psychological Review, 75(3), 242.
Jensen, A. R. (1998). The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability.
Kane, M. J., & Miyake, T. M. (2007). The validity of “conceptual span” as a measure of
working memory capacity. Memory & Cognition, 35(5), 1136–1150.
Kasper, L. J., Alderson, R. M., & Hudec, K. L. (2012). Moderators of working memory
deficits in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): A metaanalytic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 32(7), 605–617.
Keijzer, M. 2007. Last in first out? An investigation of the regression hypothesis in Dutch
emigrants in Anglophone Canada. PhD dissertation, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.
Kovacs, K., & Conway, A. R. (2019). What is IQ? Life beyond “general intelligence”.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 28(2), 189–194.
Kyllonen, P. C., & Christal, R. E. (1990). Reasoning ability is (little more than) workingmemory capacity?! Intelligence, 14(4), 389–433.
Li, X., Xiong, Z., Theeuwes, J., & Wang, B. (2020). Visual memory benefits from
prolonged encoding time regardless of stimulus type. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 46(10), 1998.
Luck, S. J., & Vogel, E. K. (1997). The capacity of visual working memory for features and
conjunctions. Nature, 390(6657), 279–281.
Luria, R., Sessa, P., Gotler, A., Jolicœur, P., & Dell’Acqua, R. (2010). Visual short-term
memory capacity for simple and complex objects. Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 22
(3), 496–512.
Macmillan, N. A., & Kaplan, H. L. (1985). Detection theory analysis of group data:
Estimating sensitivity from average hit and false-alarm rates. Psychological Bulletin,
98(1), 185.
Norris, J. M. (2018). Developing C-tests for estimating proficiency in foreign language
research. New York, NY: Peter Lang.
Oberauer, K., Schulze, R., Wilhelm, O., & Süß, H.-M. (2005). Working memory and
intelligence-their correlation and their relation: Comment on Ackerman, Beier, and
Boyle (2005). Psychological Bulletin, 131(1), 61–65.
Olson, I. R., & Jiang, Y. (2002). Is visual short-term memory object based? Rejection of
the “strong-object” hypothesis. Perception & psychophysics, 64, 1055–1067.
Ortego, K., & Störmer, V. S. (2024). Similarity in feature space dictates the efficiency of
attentional selection during ensemble processing. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Park, S., & Holzman, P. S. (1992). Schizophrenics show spatial working memory deficits.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 49(12), 975–982.
Potter, M. C. (1993). Very short-term conceptual memory. Memory & Cognition, 21,
156–161.
Quirk, C., Adam, K. C., & Vogel, E. K. (2020). No evidence for an object working memory
capacity benefit with extended viewing time. Eneuro, 7(5).
Raven, J. (2000). The Raven’s progressive matrices: Change and stability over culture
and time. Cognitive Psychology, 41(1), 1–48.
Raven, J., Raven, J. C., & Court, J. H. (1993). Manual for Raven’s progressive matrices
and vocabulary scales revised. Oxford: Oxford Psychologists Press.
Rohde, T. E., & Thompson, L. A. (2007). Predicting academic achievement with cognitive
ability. Intelligence, 35(1), 83–92.
Salthouse, T. A., & Pink, J. E. (2008). Why is working memory related to fluid
intelligence? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 364–371.

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jml.2025.104648.
Data availability
All data are available online (https://osf.io/djg2b/).
References
