reviews, see Anderson & Hanslmayr, 2014; Anderson & Hulbert, 2021;
Levy & Anderson, 2002). In the encoding phase of this paradigm, par­
ticipants study category-exemplar pairs from different semantic cate­
gories (e.g., for the categories “color” and “metal”, category-exemplar
pairs could be: “color-blue”, “color-red” or “metal-copper”). In the
subsequent intermediate phase, participants practice retrieving exem­
plars from some of the categories (e.g., practicing “color-blue”, but not
“color-red” for the color category, and do not practice any of the ex­
emplars from the metal category, which is used as a baseline). This is
followed by a test phase in which participants retrieve all category-

exemplar pairs that were initially studied. As expected, practiced
items (e.g., “color-blue”) are better remembered than unpracticed items
(e.g., “color-red”). However, unpracticed items are remembered less
than baseline items (e.g., “color-red” is remembered less than “metalcopper”). This finding is thought to reflect an unintentional inhibitory
mechanism that suppresses similar items in memory (as the items that
were not practiced were semantically related to the items which were
practiced). This pattern of results has been referred to as “retrievalinduced forgetting” (RIF; Anderson et al., 1994). While retrievalinduced forgetting has largely been studied using verbal stimuli, it has
also been shown to occur with visual stimuli (Maxcey & Woodman,
2014; Rugo et al., 2017; Scotti et al., 2020; Wimber et al., 2015). These
results suggest that inhibition can suppress related or competing infor­
mation in memory, which enables us to more accurately retrieve pre­
viously experienced information.
Furthermore, the degree of similarity or competition between ex­
emplars within individual categories can also impact RIF (for a review,

This article is part of a special issue entitled: ‘Individual differences in memory’ published in Journal of Memory and Language.
* Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, Sullivan Academic Center, S241, Worcester State University, Worcester, MA 01602, USA.
E-mail address: bjeye@worcester.edu (B.M. Jeye).

☆

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2025.104714
Received 1 April 2024; Received in revised form 5 November 2025; Accepted 11 November 2025
Available online 17 November 2025
0749-596X/© 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

A.R. Acevedo et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 146 (2026) 104714

memory was significantly impaired in individuals with aphantasia in
comparison to controls (i.e., individuals without aphantasia). There is
also empirical support connecting mental imagery and autobiographical
memory (a specific type of long-term memory that is associated with
memory for one’s personal lifetime events; Butler et al., 2016; Green­
berg & Knowlton, 2014; Rubin, 2006; Vannucci et al., 2016; Williams
et al., 1999). For instance, enhanced autobiographical memory is asso­
ciated with higher levels of mental imagery ability (Vannucci et al.,
2016) and high mental imagery is associated with facilitated access (i.e.,
quicker reaction time) to specific memories of autobiographical events
(Williams et al., 1999). Furthermore, a meta-analysis by Svoboda et al.,
(2006) found neural evidence for this relationship, where the same re­
gions involved in visual mental imagery and visuospatial processing,
such as occipital regions, were also active during autobiographical
memory retrieval. These results indicate that there is a relationship
between mental imagery ability and memory.
Of particular relevance to the current study, mental imagery has
been found to influence RIF (Saunders et al., 2009). In a modified
version of the retrieval-practice paradigm, participants were presented
with word category-exemplar pairs. Then they were split into three
groups for the intermediate phase, in which there were differences in
how some of the category-exemplar pairs were practiced. One group was
given category cues and word stems to complete (retrieval practice
condition), the second group was given exemplars and had to retrieve
the associated category cues (the representation condition) and the last
group engaged in mental imagery for details of the category-exemplar
pairs (the mental imagery condition). Participants in this last group
were also asked to rate the vividness of their mental imagery using a
variation of the VVIQ scale. Then, participants in all groups completed a
category cued recall task. It was found that those in the mental imagery
condition had similar levels of retrieval-induced forgetting as those in
the retrieval practice condition, but there no relationship between the
vividness of the mental imagery (as measured by the VVIQ scale) and the
amount of retrieval-induced forgetting (Saunders et al., 2009). While
this study suggests that mental imagery can influence inhibition in
memory, questions remain about the relationship between general
mental imagery ability and inhibition (especially in tasks that do not
explicitly call for visualization strategies), and whether this relationship
exists in tasks using visual stimuli. Therefore, the current study aimed to
understand whether individuals who have higher mental imagery ability
show either increased accuracy or increased inhibition in the distorteditem paradigm and with visual stimuli.
Furthermore, as we used facial stimuli in our distorted-item para­
digm, we were also interested the relationship between facial recogni­
tion ability (i.e., another individual difference related to detailed
visualization) and both accuracy and inhibitory processing in memory.
In particular, we assessed whether individuals who have higher levels of
face recognition ability (i.e., the ability to visualize differences in faces)
also have increased memory accuracy and/or increased inhibition dur­
ing our distorted-item paradigm. One classic test of facial recognition is
the Cambridge Face Memory Test (CFMT; Duchaine & Nakayama,
2006). The CFMT involves showing participants a series of photos of
individual people and then asking them to recognize those faces later on
among a set of distractor faces (e.g., from various viewpoints, such as left
third profile, frontal view, and right third profile) or under different
conditions (e.g., the same face using a different pose or under different
lighting conditions). It is a leading measure for facial recognition ability
and often used to assess those with prosopagnosia (i.e., the neurological
condition in which people are not able to recognize familiar faces; Balas
& Saville, 2015; Duchaine & Nakayama, 2006; Gray et al., 2017; Grüter
et al., 2009; Hedley et al., 2011; Miller & Saygin, 2013; Shah et al., 2015;
Tree & Wilkie, 2010). Therefore, the ability to discriminate between
faces is an essential component of being able to memorize them and may
influence what specific facial details are later retrieved.
As mental imagery and facial recognition are both cognitive pro­
cesses that involve detailed visualization, we investigated whether these

see Marsh & Anderson, 2022). For example, one study modified the
retrieval-practice paradigm so that during the encoding phase partici­
pants were exposed to unrelated exemplars or related exemplars
(Anderson et al., 2000). They found that exemplars with high similarity
increased retrieval impairment (i.e., there was more inhibition, which
led to more forgetting of the highly similar exemplars), whereas exem­
plars with low similarity had the opposite effect (i.e., they were
remembered more). Additionally, a meta-analysis investigating the role
of taxonomic frequency in verbal stimuli used in the retrieval-practice
paradigm found more RIF for stronger exemplars than for weaker ex­
emplars (Murayama et al., 2014). These findings show that inhibition
can be flexibly directed at stimuli of varying similarity to help
discriminate between related and target memories.
While these studies demonstrate that similar competitors are
inhibited during memory retrieval, they primarily used semantic stim­
uli, which are hard to systematically adapt to create varying levels of
relatedness. Recently, we investigated inhibition in long-term memory
specificity using a novel distorted-item paradigm (Jeye et al., 2020)
using visual stimuli (i.e., faces). Furthermore, an additional benefit of
this distorted-item paradigm is that it only consists of a study and test
phase, which more directly mimics the real-world environment (unlike
the retrieval-practice paradigm which also has an intermediate practice
phase). During the study phase of the distorted-item paradigm, partici­
pants were asked to remember male and female Caucasian faces, and
then were given an old–new recognition memory test in which they saw
a second set of faces. This second set of faces consisted of old, related (i.
e., morphs of old faces), and new faces. We first found that memory
representations were very specific as the “old” response rate to old faces
was significantly greater than highly similar morphs. We also found that
the “old” response rate for highly similar morphed faces was signifi­
cantly lower than more distantly related morphed faces. This reflects the
unintentional inhibition of closely related faces, similar to what is
observed during the retrieval-practice paradigm, with retrieval-induced
forgetting.
Taken together, this research along with the research on RIF dem­
onstrates that long-term memory depends on both accurately retrieving
detailed representations and, also, unintentionally inhibiting highly
similar (i.e., competing) information. In the present study, we examined
how individual differences in cognitive processes related to intentional
(i.e., voluntary) visualization (such as mental imagery and facial
recognition) influence these processes in our distorted-item paradigm.
For example, individual differences in how details are visualized might
influence how well participants accurately remember old faces. That is,
individuals who are better able to intentionally form detailed images of
specific faces might be better at distinguishing old faces from highly
related competitors. Similarly, inhibition may depend on how well an
individual can call to mind details during the retrieval process, which
would predict a relationship between visualization and inhibitory pro­
cessing. Alternatively, if inhibition during memory retrieval is
completely unintentional (i.e., automatic or involuntary), we would
expect no relationship between how well an individual can intentionally
visualize details and their performance in the distorted-item paradigm.
To investigate these questions, we first evaluated individual’s mental
imagery ability. Mental imagery is the ability to form voluntary visual
images and is typically assessed using the Vividness of Visual Imagery
Questionnaire (VVIQ; Marks, 1973). The VVIQ asks participants to
create a mental image for 16 different items and then rate the vividness
of the imagery on a five-point scale. Individuals who score low on the
VVIQ are thought to have aphantasia (i.e., the inability to form volun­
tary mental imagery), and it has been shown that aphantasics can have
deficits in memory, including working memory as well as object memory
(Bainbridge et al., 2021b; Brewer & Pani, 1996; Jacobs et al., 2018). For
example, in a recent study by Bainbridge et al. (2021b), participants
with aphantasia (as measured via the VVIQ) studied real-world scene
images (e.g., a bedroom or a kitchen) and then drew them from memory.
It was found that, although spatial memory was preserved, object
2

A.R. Acevedo et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 146 (2026) 104714

individual differences influence memory accuracy and unintentional
inhibition during memory retrieval. Participants completed both the
VVIQ and the CFMT to assess individual differences in mental imagery
and facial recognition, as well as our distorted-item paradigm to test for
memory accuracy and inhibition. To anticipate the results, we replicated
our original findings where we show inhibition of highly similar faces in
memory and, further, we found that neither VVIQ or CFMT scores were
associated with memory inhibition. However, we did find a relationship
between CFMT scores and memory accuracy. This suggests that accu­
rately recollecting faces may rely on how well individuals can visualize
facial details, but that inhibition during memory retrieval is likely an
unintentional process that is unrelated to how well individuals can
voluntarily form detailed visualizations.
Methods
Data availability
The stimuli and data for this study are available to download at the
following link. https://osf.io/8vqt7/.
Participants
Fig. 1. Example of the experimental set-up for the distorted-item paradigm.
Top. In the study phase, neutral Caucasian faces were presented in the center of
the screen. In the test phase, old faces, related faces, and new faces were pre­
sented and participants classified each face as “old” or “new” followed by a
“remember”–“know”–“guess” rating. Bottom. An example of the face stimuli
used in the test phase.

A total of 176 Worcester State University (WSU) students aged 18 to
65 (139 females, 36 males, and one participant who did not provide a
gender; M = 20.64 years) participated in the study. Fourteen partici­
pants were excluded: two participants were excluded because of tech­
nical computer issues and twelve participants were excluded due to lack
of responses (e.g., there were no “old” responses to one or more face
types). This sample size was determined based on previous research by
Jeye et al. (2020) to replicate the original inhibitory results of the study
using the distorted-item memory paradigm (i.e., comparing percent
“old” responses between 20 % and 40 % morphs). A power analysis
(G*Power; Faul et al., 2007) indicated that a sample size of 156 would be
needed, assuming power = .8, a small effect size (Cohen’s d = .20), and
α = .05, with a one-tailed t-test (as the direction of the critical com­
parisons was known). The WSU Institutional Review Board approved the
protocol and informed consent was obtained from participants prior to
beginning the study. Students received research credit following
participation in the study.

were not informed about how many of each type of face they would be
presented with during the test phase. The faces (old or related) pre­
sented in the test phase were only associated with one old face that had
appeared during the study phase (i.e., if shown a 40 % morph of a
particular face during the test phase, no other morph type of that face
would be shown). Faces were pseudo-randomized and no more than two
faces of a given type were presented sequentially. For additional infor­
mation on face stimuli construction, see Jeye et al. (2020). A perceptual
follow-up study determined that participants were able to perceive
critical differences between old and 20 % morphs (see Supplementary
Material for more information).
During the test phase, each face was presented for 3 s, after which a
memory strength rating reminder was presented for 2.5 s, followed by a
0.5 s blank screen. While the faces were on the screen, participants were
instructed to make “old”–“new” recognition judgements. An “old”
response indicated the face was the same as a face from the study phase,
whereas a “new” response indicated the face was not seen previously or
was similar to one seen during the study phase. Participants were told
that they would be presented with faces that would be very similar to
those seen in the study phase, but that they should respond with “old”
only if the face was the same as a face shown during the study phase.
This was followed by a memory strength judgment where participants
gave a “remember”, “know”, or “guess” response. Participants were
instructed to selected “remember” if they could recall specific details of
the face, “know” if they could not recall specific details of the face but
were sure that it was presented (or not), during the study phase, and
“guess” if they were not sure whether the face was presented during the
study phase. To respond, participants pressed buttons on the computer
keyboard (with the hand of their choice), using keys 1, 2, and 3. Sets of
faces were counterbalanced across participants using a Latin square
design, and stimuli were presented on Dell desktop computers using Eprime software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA).

Procedure
Distorted-Item memory paradigm
This paradigm is a modified replication of that used by Jeye et al.
(2020). Each participant completed a one-third length practice run and
two full length runs. A full run consisted of a study and test phase.
During the study phase, participants were sequentially presented with
20 neutral Caucasian faces (10 females, 10 males) at the center of the
screen, and they were instructed to remember the faces. Each face was
randomly presented three times, however, no more than two male or
two female faces were presented in sequence. Participants were
informed that the faces would be repeated randomly three times during
the study phase and that the purpose of this was to boost their memory
for the faces. All faces were unique (that is, faces were not repeated
across runs). Each face was presented for 2.5 s, after which a blank
screen was presented for 0.5 s.
After the conclusion of the study phase, there was an 8 s delay,
during which a reminder of task instructions appeared on the screen.
The test phase of each full-length run consisted of 24 faces (12 male, 12
female), which were, once again, sequentially presented at the center of
the screen. Within these faces were old, related, and new faces (see Fig. 1
for an example of related faces). Related faces were created by morphing
together old and uniquely new faces in increments of 20 % (i.e., 20 %,
40 %, 60 %, 80 % morphs). The test phase consisted of four old faces,
four faces of each type of related face, and four new faces. Participants

Cambridge face memory test
To assess individual differences in face recognition, the Cambridge
Face Memory Test was used (Duchaine & Nakayama, 2006). This test
3

A.R. Acevedo et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 146 (2026) 104714

consists of four stages (practice, introduction/same images, novel im­
ages and novel images with noise). In the practice stage participants
gained familiarity with the task via cartoon faces. Participants were
instructed to memorize the following faces and were shown three study
images of Bart Simpson for three seconds each: a left one-third profile, a
frontal view and a right one-third profile. A test item consisting of one of
the study images of Bart Simpson and two other cartoon faces were then
presented and participants indicated which face they have seen before.
This was followed by two additional test items, each which had one
study face and two distractor faces. The introduction stage was nearly
identical to the practice stage; however, either photographs of men’s
faces or computer-generated men’s faces were used instead of cartoons.
There were six target faces in total. In the novel images stage, partici­
pants were shown one image consisting of frontal shots of novel images
of the six target faces (e.g., the same face using a different pose or under
different lighting conditions), which they were given 20 s to review.
Participants then went through 30-forced choice test items, each con­
sisting of two distractor items and one study item, and, once again, they
were instructed to select the study item. The last stage was the novel
images with noise, which was nearly identical to the novel images stage.
Participants viewed the same frontal images of the target faces, and then
went through 24 test items. However, in contrast with the novel image
stage, the test items had different levels of white noise added to them.
Scores on the CFMT could range from 0 to 72. The CFMT was displayed
on Dell desktop computers through the Test My Brain Initiative (https
://testmybrain.org/; Germine et al., 2012).
The CFMT has demonstrated strong reliability and validity as a
measure of facial recognition ability. In particular, studies report
Cronbach’s alpha values typically ranging from 0.85 to 0.90 (Bowles
et al., 2009; Wilmer et al., 2012). Relatedly, the norms for the CFMT
have been assessed for age, sex and testing country (Bowles et al., 2009),
and several versions of the test exist exploring differences in race/
ethnicity (e.g., the CFMT-Chinese; McKone et al., 2017) and gender
(Arrington et al., 2022).

first ran a repeated-measures ANOVA. Then to replicate our original
findings as shown in Jeye et al. (2020) we focused on two specific
comparisons of interest using paired t-tests: 1) comparing the “old”
response rate for old faces to the “old” response rate for the 20 % morphs
to assess detailed memory retrieval and 2) comparing the “old” response
rate for 20 % morphs to the “old” response rate for 40 % morphs to assess
whether there were inhibitory effects. A d’ analysis was also conducted
to ensure the memory effects were not due to response biases. Cohen’s
d was used to measure effect size and reported for significant results.
A secondary follow-up analysis was conducted based on the memory
strength judgments to assess whether the effects differed as a function of
memory strength level. Specifically, the percentage of “old” responses
for each face type (i.e., old faces, 20 %, 40 %, 60 %, 80 % morphs, and
new faces) was computed for each memory strength level (i.e.,
“remember”, “know”, and “guess”). Since our comparisons of interest
were between 1) old faces and 20 % morphs and 2) 20 % and 40 %
morphs, we first assessed whether the percent “old” responses were
different between old faces and 20 % morphs across “remember”,
“know” and “guess” responses using a repeated-measures ANOVA.
Additionally, as we knew the direction of the comparison from our
primary analyses, we ran a series of one-tailed paired sample t-tests
between old faces and 20 % morphs at each memory strength level. We
followed a similar procedure to assess the differences between “old”
response rates for 20 % and 40 % morphs for each memory strength
level. Lastly, we also calculated a corrected familiarity score for each
face type using the following equation: (percent “old” response for
“know” judgments)/(1 – percent “old” response for “remember” judg­
ments). This was to account for the fact that recollection (represented by
“remember” responses) and familiarity (represented by “know” re­
sponses) may not be mutually exclusive (Yonelinas & Jacoby, 1995).
Individual differences correlational analyses
Additionally, to assess whether individual differences in face
recognition and mental imagery ability influenced long-term face
memory specificity, we performed a series of planned correlations. First,
we calculated a memory accuracy score for each participant (which was
the difference between the percent “old” response for old faces and the
percent “old” response for 20 % morphs, collapsing across memory
strength judgments). Using a Pearson correlation, we then assessed
whether this score for each participant was associated with scores on the
CFMT and VVIQ. Second, we computed a memory inhibition score for
each participant (which was the difference between the percent “old”
response rate for 40 % morphs and the percent “old” response rate for
20 % morphs, collapsing across memory strength judgments) and
assessed whether this inhibition score was correlated with scores on the
CFMT and VVIQ. We also determined whether these correlations were
significantly different from each other by converting each correlation
coefficient into a z-score using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation, computing
the asymptotic covariance of the estimates and, lastly, using these in an
asymptotic z-test (Lee & Preacher, 2013).
Furthermore, we investigated the correlation between scores on the
CFMT and VVIQ. Previous research suggests that there may be a rela­
tionship between intentional mental imagery and facial recognition
ability (Grüter et al., 2009). Thus, we aimed to examine this association
in the present study. Finally, we examined whether participants’ mem­
ory accuracy score was correlated with their memory inhibition score
during the distorted-item paradigm. That is, do people who more
accurately distinguish old faces from highly related morphs demonstrate
more inhibition during memory retrieval. In order to assess whether this
correlation was dependent on CFMT and VVIQ scores, we ran a partial
correlation between memory accuracy and memory inhibition scores
controlling for CFMT and VVIQ scores. For any null results, we con­
ducted a Bayesian analysis using a two-sided alternative hypothesis with
prior (default) distribution values of − 1 to 1. All analyses were con­
ducted using JASP (Version 0.19.0).

Vividness of visual imagery questionnaire
To assess visual mental imagery, the Vividness of Visual Imagery
Questionnaire (VVIQ) was used (Marks, 1973). The questionnaire
included 16 different items which are separated in blocks of four. Each
block included a one-sentence theme (e.g., “For items 13–16, think of a
country scene which involves trees, mountains, and a lake. Consider the
picture that comes before your mind’s eye.”), followed by four items
which narrate said themes. Participants were asked to attempt to create
a visual mental image of each item and rate its vividness on a five-point
scale (1 = Perfectly clear and as vivid as normal vision, 2 = Clear and
reasonably vivid, 3 = Moderately clear and vivid, 4 = Vague and dim, 5
= No image at all, you only “know” that you are thinking of the object).
Thus, scores ranged from 16 (superior visual mental imagery) to 80
(poor visual mental imagery). Participants were not persuaded to use
any particular technique to create mental imagery (e.g., keeping their
eyes opened or closed). Participants completed the VVIQ using a pen and
paper and were scored by the first author or research assistants.
The VVIQ has also demonstrated to be a reliable measure of mental
imagery ability with Cronbach’s alpha values typically in the .76-.90
range (for review see Suica et al., 2022). Moreover, the VVIQ has been
shown to have high test–retest reliability and construct validity
(McKelvie, 1995; Campos and Pérez-Fabello, 2009).
Analyses
Behavioral analysis of distorted-Item paradigm
Primary data analyses for the distorted-item paradigm included
calculating the percentage of “old” responses out of the total number of
responses for each type of face (old faces, each type of related face, and
new faces), collapsing across memory strength judgments. To assess
overall differences in the “old” response rate across each face type, we
4

A.R. Acevedo et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 146 (2026) 104714

Results

compare 20 % and 40 % morphs (t(42) < 1). Still, these findings suggest
that inhibition effects may be related to memory strength, particularly
for familiar items.
In terms of the relationship between facial recognition and long-term
face memory, CFMT scores (M = 56.414, SD = 9.10; Supplementary
Table 3) were significantly correlated with memory accuracy (r(160) =
.26, p < .001; Fig. 3). However, CFMT scores were not significantly
correlated with inhibition during memory retrieval (r(160) = .04, p =
.60, BF10 < 1; Fig. 3). Additionally, there was a significant difference
between these correlations (z = 2.66, p = .008). This suggests that
detailed face memory retrieval, but not inhibition, depends on facial
recognition ability.
On the other hand, mental imagery ability was not found to be
related to either detailed facial memory retrieval or inhibition in
memory. VVIQ scores (M = 34.65, SD = 10.81, Cronbach’s alpha = .885;
Supplementary Table 3) were not associated with memory accuracy
scores (r(160) = .03, p = .76, BF10 < 1) or inhibition scores (r(160) =
-.06, p = .44, BF10 < 1; Fig. 4). These correlations were also not
significantly different (z = 1.07, p = .29). Moreover, we also found no
relationship between VVIQ score and CFMT score (r(160) = − .08, p =
.29, BF10 < 1; Supplementary Fig. S3).
To further investigate whether participants who had more correct
detailed memories also demonstrated more inhibition during memory
retrieval during the distorted-item paradigm, we examined the rela­
tionship between memory accuracy and memory inhibition scores. We
found a significant correlation between memory accuracy scores and
memory inhibition scores (r(160) = .43, p < .001; Supplemental Fig. S4).
A partial correlation analysis was also conducted to assess this rela­
tionship between memory accuracy and memory inhibition scores while
controlling for CFMT and VVIQ scores. This correlation was found to be
significant (r(160) = .44, p < .001). This indicates that detailed memory
accuracy may be linked to inhibitory processes that are not dependent
on cognitive visualization strategies such as those used in the CFMT and
VVIQ. To assess the reliability of the memory accuracy and memory
inhibition scores, we performed a split-half analysis by randomly
selecting and comparing the percent “old” responses for half of the
response trials at each morph level. For the memory accuracy score, the
split-half reliability analysis indicated a correlation of r(160) = .24, with
a Spearman–Brown correction reliability coefficient of r(160) = .39. For
the memory inhibition score, the split-half reliability analysis indicated
a correlation of r(160) = .09. with a Spearman–Brown correction reli­
ability coefficient of r(160) = .21.
Furthermore, we reanalyzed the data from Jeye et al. (2020) and
found significant correlations between memory accuracy scores and
memory inhibition scores in both of those experiments (r(104) = .52, p
< .001 in Experiment 1; r(94) = .32, p < .01 in Experiment 2; Supple­
mentary Fig. S4). As there were no differences in the correlation values
between experiments (all ps > .05), we collapsed across all experiments
using the distorted-item paradigm. That is, across three experiments
(over 350 participants between the current experiment and the previous
experiments from Jeye et al., 2020) we found a significant correlation
between how well participants accurately remember old faces (as
compared to highly similar morphs) and the amount of inhibition that
acts on these highly similar morphs (r(293) = .43, p < .001; Fig. 5).
These results indicate that retrieving detailed memories is associated
with unintentional inhibition of competing information in memory.

Overall, we found a significant difference in the percent “old”
response across each level of face type (F(4.45, 716.75) = 73.14, p <
.001, η2 = .312; Greenhouse-Geisser corrected; Supplementary Table 1).
Memory representations for the faces were very detailed as the “old”
response rate for old faces was significantly higher than “old” response
rate for 20 % morphs (t(161) = 7.68, p < .001, d = .78, Bonferroni
corrected; Fig. 2). This indicates that participants were able to correctly
reject closely related items. Furthermore, the “old” response rate for 20
% morphs was significantly lower than “old” response rate for 40 %
morphs (t(161) = 4.56, p < .001; d = .36, Bonferroni corrected; Fig. 2).
This can be assumed to reflect memory inhibition of closely related
faces. A d’ analysis demonstrated a similar pattern of results (see Sup­
plementary Fig. S1 and Supplementary Table 2), as the 20 % morphs d’
was significantly lower than that for both the old faces (t(161) = 7.31, p
< .001, d = .56, Bonferroni corrected) and 40 % morphs (t(161) = 4.18,
p < .001, d = .25, Bonferroni corrected).
We also investigated this pattern of results as a function of memory
strength. That is, we calculated the percent “old” response rate for each
face type across “remember”, “know” and “guess” judgments to examine
whether detailed memory retrieval and inhibition varied depending on
memory strength. Overall, in terms of memory accuracy, there was no
difference in the percent “old” response between old faces and 20 %
morphs across memory strength judgments (F(2, 84) < 1). However,
follow-up analyses assessing each memory strength level individually
found evidence of detailed memory retrieval for both “remember” and
“know” judgments. That is, for both “remember” and “know” judgments
the percent “old” response was significantly different between old faces
and 20 % morphs (for “remember” responses, t(123) = 3.74, p < .001, d
= .34; for “know” responses, t(124) = 3.50, p <.001, d = .31; Supple­
mentary Fig. S2). This memory accuracy effect was not observed for
“guess” responses (t(54) = 1.58, p = .06, d = .21; Supplementary
Fig. S2). This relationship was also observed when using a corrected
familiarity score for old faces and 20 % morphs (t(34) = 3.71, p < .001,
d = .63).
Similarly, for memory inhibition, we did not observe a significant
interaction between percent “old” response for 20 % and 40 % morphs as
a function of memory strength (F(2, 96) < 1). Our follow-up analyses
revealed that for “know” judgments the percent “old” response was
significantly lower for 20 % morphs than 40 % morphs (t(121) = 1.93, p
= .028, d = − .017). This memory inhibition was not observed for either
“remember” (t(119) = 1.47, p = .072, d = -.13) or “guess” (t(72) = 1.38,
p = .086, d = − .16) judgments. However, significant memory inhibition
was also not observed when using a corrected familiarity score to

Discussion
The present study investigated whether individual differences in face
recognition and mental imagery ability influenced inhibition in longterm face memory specificity. Our findings reveal that intentional
mental imagery ability (as measured by the VVIQ) is not associated with
inhibition or detailed memory retrieval in long-term facial memory. We
also did not observe a significant correlation between inhibition in longterm memory and face recognition ability (as measured by the CFMT).

Fig. 2. The percent “old” responses for old faces, related faces (i.e., 20 %, 40 %,
60 %, 80 % morphs), and new faces in the distorted-item paradigm. Error bars
represent standard error, ***= p < .001.
5

A.R. Acevedo et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 146 (2026) 104714

Fig. 3. Left. The relationship between CFMT score and memory accuracy score (i.e., the difference between the “old” response rate for old faces and the “old”
response rate for 20% morphs). Right. The relationship between CFMT score and memory inhibition score (i.e., the difference between the “old” response rate for
40% morphs and the “old” response rate for 20% morphs).

Fig. 4. Left. The relationship between VVIQ score and memory accuracy score (i.e., the difference between the “old” response rate for old faces and the “old”
response rate for 20% morphs). Right. The relationship between VVIQ score and memory inhibition score (i.e., the difference between the “old” response rate for 40%
morphs and the “old” response rate for 20% morphs).

However, a significant relationship was found between face recognition
and memory accuracy. That is, individuals with high scores on the CFMT
were better able to discriminate between old and highly similar faces (i.
e., 20 % morphs) in the distorted-item paradigm. Furthermore, we also
found a significant correlation between memory accuracy and memory
inhibition in our distorted-item paradigm (in both the current experi­
ment and those reported previously by Jeye et al., 2020). Taken
together, these results indicate that long-term memory specificity de­
pends on unintentional inhibition that is independent of intentional
cognitive processes related to visualization ability (i.e., mental image
and facial recognition).
Critically, we replicated the original findings of Jeye et al. (2020)
which found that inhibition was involved in face memory specificity. In
this paradigm, the “old” response rate for old faces was significantly
higher than that of 20 % morphs. This difference in percent “old”
response between old faces and 20 % morphs demonstrates detailed
memory accuracy for face stimuli, which aligns with previous research
assessing the precision of visual long-term memory (Brady et al., 2008;
Brady et al., 2013). Furthermore, the “old” response rate for closely
related faces (i.e., 20 % morphs) was significantly lower than that of
distantly related faces (i.e., 40 % morphs). As originally described by

Jeye et al. (2020), this pattern of results is similar to those observed in
center-surround suppression of related or distracting items in attention
and working memory paradigms (Dagenbach & Carr, 1994; Kiyonaga &
Egner, 2016; Slotnick et al., 2002; Slotnick et al., 2003; Störmer and
Alvarez, 2014). This suggests that there is an unintentional inhibitory
mechanism that acts on closely related items in long-term memory,
which may help individuals recall specific facial details.
Furthermore, there is growing evidence that demonstrates the role of
unintentional inhibitory processing in visual long-term memory more
broadly (Anderson et al., 1994; Healey et al., 2014; Ngo & Hasher,
2017). That is, there is inhibitory processing that occurs when in­
dividuals retrieve a studied item among related items without an explicit
cue to either remember or forget each item. This has been demonstrated
with semantic stimuli (e.g., related word pairs), and visual stimuli
(Maxcey & Woodman, 2014; Waldhauser et al., 2012; Wimber et al.,
2015), including faces (Ferreira et al., 2014; Ferreira et al., 2019; Rugo
et al., 2017). Additionally, research has examined how the number and
similarity between items can lead to changes in memory, such as when
the memories for items are blended together (i.e., “attraction”) or
exaggerated (i.e., “repulsion”; Chanales et al., 2021; Drascher & Kuhl,
2022; Scotti et al., 2021a,b). In particular, it is thought that this
6

A.R. Acevedo et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 146 (2026) 104714

memory strength. In the current paradigm, participants were asked to
make a “remember”, “know’, or “guess” judgment after their initial
“old”–“new” response. These judgments are a measure of the amount of
subjective detail a participant can retrieve. That is, a “remember”
response is indicative of recollection (retrieval with specific details) and
a “know” response reflects familiarity (retrieval without specific details;
Slotnick, 2013; Yonelinas et al., 2010). We found that memory perfor­
mance is related to both memory accuracy (as shown by a significant
difference in the “old” response rate between old faces and 20 %) and
memory inhibition (as shown by a significant difference in the “old”
response rate between 20 % and 40 % morphs). This shows that inhib­
itory processing in long-term memory may be flexibly recruited
depending on memory strength and may not be necessary for the
conscious experience of retrieving specific details (as we did not see this
pattern of results for “remember” responses).
One limitation of the current paradigm is that it used computerized
face stimuli. Thus, there is a question of whether this pattern of inhi­
bition in long-term face memory applies to real human faces, and,
further, whether general facial recognition ability (i.e., the ability to
perceive differences between faces) is related to inhibition in facial
memory specificity. In particular, when assessing the reliability of our
memory accuracy and memory inhibition scores in the current distorteditem paradigm, we found relatively low split-half reliability estimates. It
is possible that this is due to the use of computerized faces, which may be
processed differently than real human faces. Additionally, the current
results indicate that general facial recognition ability (as measured by
the CFMT) is not associated with inhibitory processing. This is similar to
our findings related to memory strength mentioned previously. On the
other hand, we did find that face recognition ability was significantly
associated with memory accuracy (i.e., the ability to discriminate be­
tween old and highly related faces in memory). This finding indicates
that one’s ability to remember specific faces may depend on one’s ability
to perceive differences in them, and that this may be a conscious process.
This relationship further validates the original distorted-item paradigm
by Jeye et al. (2020), as memory scores determined with the comput­
erized face stimuli significantly correlated with scores on the CFMT (an
empirically tested measure for assessing face recognition ability;
Duchaine & Nakayama, 2006).
Another limitation of the current research is that both the stimuli
from the memory paradigm and the CFMT were that of Caucasian faces.
Future research should aim to investigate the implication of the ownrace bias (that is, where unfamiliar faces from other racial groups are
remembered less than that of one’s own race group; Meissner & Brig­
ham, 2001) in both face recognition ability and inhibition in long-term
face memory specificity by using more racially diverse samples and
stimuli. It may be that individuals of a certain racial group would
experience more inhibition for faces of their own racial group, which
would help them remember those specific faces more than faces of a
different racial group. However, it could also be hypothesized that in­
hibition could be needed for people to recognize faces outside of their
racial group in order to help them select the correct face from memory.
Furthermore, the current relationship between face recognition
ability and memory accuracy is supported by previous research in in­
dividuals with prosopagnosia (i.e., individuals with a congenital
inability to recognize familiar faces). Parketny et al. (2015) employed
the use of a long-term facial memory paradigm to investigate event
related potentials (ERPs) in developmental prosopagnosics and controls.
They found a delayed N250 activation (a marker of a stored visual facial
memory representation) and delayed P600 activation (a marker asso­
ciated with conscious awareness and recognition of a specific face) in
developmental prosopagnosics. This demonstrates that those with se­
vere face recognition deficits also experience delays in activation of
visual facial memories. Furthermore, it has been shown that individuals
with developmental prosopagnosia also experience deficits in short-term
facial memory, where developmental prosopagnosics took longer and
were less accurate in their responses in a face-matching task (Shah et al.,

Fig. 5. The relationship between memory accuracy scores and memory inhi­
bition scores across all participants in the distorted-item paradigm with facial
stimuli (i.e., the current experiment and Experiments 1 and 2 from Jeye
et al., 2020).

“repulsion” helps to minimize errors between competing similar mem­
ories. Taken together, this suggests that unintentional inhibitory pro­
cessing may modulate visual long-term memory and that it may be
triggered by the relatedness between memories.
While other studies have investigated the specificity of visual longterm memory, ours are the first, to our knowledge, to show evidence
of center-surround suppression (Jeye et al., 2020; Jeye et al., 2024). This
might be due, in part, to overall limitations in stimulus/study design. For
example, other studies have used face morphs to investigate differences
in long-term memory (Turney & Dennis, 2017). However, this research
used different increments in the perceptual relatedness between the face
morphs to ours (e.g., we used smaller increments of 20 %). It is possible
that inhibition works at category boundaries (similar to what is observed
in working memory studies; Fang et al., 2019; Johnson & Anderson,
2004; Martin & Chao, 2001; Yang & Mo, 2017), and, since faces have
smaller category boundaries, using face morphs with larger differences
may not be sensitive enough to probe inhibitory processing. Relatedly,
more recent research has used alternative assessments of memory
specificity, such as continuous scales or drawing to measure color,
orientation and/or location accuracy (Bainbridge, Kwok & Baker, 2021;
Bainbridge et al., 2021b; Berens et al., 2020; Brady et al., 2013; Cooper
& Ritchey, 2019; Harlow & Yonelinas, 2016; Miner et al., 2020; Richter
et al., 2016). Continuous measurements (such as when participants use a
color wheel to indicate the color of previously seen items), for example,
are inherently different than our recognition judgements (i.e., “old” or
“new” responses), and therefore, may not capture inhibitory processing
in memory. Even in studies that use more traditional recognition
judgements there are differences in the stimuli used and types of
recognition judgements made. For instance, research using the mne­
monic similarity task, which assesses memory discrimination (i.e., the
ability to distinguish between similar items; Stark et al., 2019), uses
images of real-world objects and asks participants to make “old,”
“similar,” or “new” judgments during the testing phase (where partici­
pants are shown old objects, lure/similar objects, or completely new
items). In particular, it would be difficult to morph these real-world
objects incrementally along a consistent spectrum of perceptual simi­
larity, and thus these stimuli may not be able to capture subtle variations
in memory specificity. Furthermore, the use of “old,” “similar,” or “new”
judgments may limit the ability to assess the pattern of center-surround
suppression that we observed in our task for inhibitory processing.
Future work should continue to examine how differences in stimulus and
task design impact inhibition in visual long-term memory specificity.
Our results also demonstrate that inhibition may be related to
7

A.R. Acevedo et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 146 (2026) 104714

memory specificity. Additionally, while the VVIQ is a widely used
measure of mental imagery, it is relatively “crude,” relying predomi­
nantly on subjective, self-reported vividness of scenes rather than other
forms of imagery. As mentioned previously, recent advancements, such
as drawing-based methods (e.g., Bainbridge et al., 2021a), offer more
nuanced ways to assess mental imagery and memory and have yielded
different results. Future research should explore the relationship be­
tween memory and imagery using more specific measures tailored to
particular stimuli, including faces. This could help determine if imagery
abilities may vary across different categories of visual stimuli. In terms
of the current study, our results indicate that conscious mental imagery
ability may not be necessarily related to facial memory specificity.
Overall, the current study found no association between intentional
detailed visualization (e.g., mental imagery ability and facial recogni­
tion) and unintentional inhibition in long-term face memory specificity.
This indicates that inhibition acts as a non-conscious process during
memory retrieval. Furthermore, future research should investigate what
other individual differences, such as in cognitive control and mecha­
nisms related to perception and attention, could also influence inhibi­
tion in long-term face memory specificity. For instance, this
unintentional inhibitory processing might be associated with individual
differences in priming (a cognitive process that similarly reflects nonconscious processing of stimuli). Relatedly, future research could
examine the brain timing associated with inhibition during memory
retrieval within our distorted-item task. For example, research using the
retrieval-practice paradigm has found an increase in alpha activity for
competing memories, signifying inhibition (Waldhauser et al., 2012). In
our distorted-item paradigm, we might expect an increase in alpha ac­
tivity in posterior visual regions when participants view the 20 %
morphs, as compared to the old faces or 40 % morphs. Furthermore,
there is a growing push to research individual differences in both mental
imagery ability and, separately, in facial recognition, especially with
regard to practical implications such as for identity checking careers and
human-artificial intelligence research (Floridou et al., 2022; White &
Burton, 2022).

2015). Taken together, there is both behavioral and ERP evidence for the
relationship found between face recognition and facial memory. Future
research should investigate the neural underpinnings of the connection
between the facial perception and face memory specificity, especially in
the brain regions involved with each.
Another aim of the current study was to assess whether individual
differences in intentional mental imagery ability would influence longterm face memory specificity, as previous research indicated that
there is a relationship between mental imagery and memory (Bainbridge
et al., 2021a; Brewer & Pani, 1996; Butler et al., 2016; Greenberg &
Knowlton, 2014; Rubin, 2006; Vannucci et al., 2016; Williams et al.,
1999). However, we found no relationship between VVIQ scores and
memory inhibition or between VVIQ scores and memory accuracy. This
further suggests that inhibition in memory occurs unintentionally. While
this seems to contradict previous research on this topic, it is important to
note that the majority of this research used explicit cues related to
mental imagery. For example, Saunders et al. (2009) included a mental
imagery condition in a modified retrieval-practice paradigm in which
participants were instructed to imagine word-pair associations during
the intermediate practice phase. They found that participants who
engaged in this mental imagery condition showed evidence of RIF.
Additionally, other research investigating the relationship between
mental imagery and memory did not directly look at the role of inhibi­
tion during the retrieval process. For instance, Bainbridge et al. (2021a)
used real world scenes and had participants re-draw them from memory
and Butler et al. (2016) had participants recall recent autobiographical
events in response to a word cue. Both found a relationship between
mental imagery ability and memory. It is also possible we did not see a
relationship between mental imagery and memory inhibition because
imagery may not rely on accurately recalling details of the representa­
tion (but instead may rely on subjective feelings of confidence). Future
research will need to investigate under what conditions confidence and
vividness are connected and how these measures impact memory
specificity.
Lastly, we found that scores on the CFMT and VVIQ were not related.
Research on mental imagery and face recognition has not reached a
consensus on if, or how, these cognitive abilities relate. Milton et al.
(2021) found that although individuals with aphantasia (i.e., individuals
with an inability to create mental images) perceived their face recog­
nition ability to be worse than both individuals with hyperphantasia (i.
e., people with a superior ability to create mental images) and controls
(i.e., people of average mental imagery ability), there were no signifi­
cant differences in behavioral performance between groups on a face
recognition task. On the other hand, there is some evidence to suggest
that individuals with congenital prosopagnosia experience some visual
mental imagery deficits, however, these deficits seem to be specific to
faces only (and not for other visual stimuli). For example, Tree and
Wilkie (2010) found that although object and color imagery was pre­
served, face imagery was impaired in individuals with congenital pro­
sopagnosia. Furthermore, Grüter et al. (2009) showed that individuals
with congenital prosopagnosia had preserved mental imagery for houses
but impaired face imagery. Thus, there seems to be a relationship be­
tween mental imagery and face recognition ability, however, it seems to
be face specific. The current study did not specifically investigate im­
agery for just faces (as the VVIQ has questions related to different types
of visual imagery), and therefore, it is possible that this is why no
relationship was found.
Taken together, the absence of significant findings using the VVIQ
raises questions about whether our null results might be attributed to the
type of stimuli we used or limitations of the measure itself. For example,
faces, as stimuli, are processed differently from other types of visual
items, such as objects or scenes (Haxby et al., 2000), and this unique
processing could have contributed to the lack of observed relationships
between mental imagery and memory. It is possible that if we had used
more detailed and/or varied stimuli (such as scenes) that we may have
observed a significant relationship between mental imagery and

Author contributions
A. R. Acevedo and B. M. Jeye developed the study design. Testing
and data collection was performed by A.R. Acevedo. Analyses were
performed by A. R. Acevedo and B. M. Jeye. A. R. Acevedo, B. M. Jeye
and S. D. Slotnick drafted the manuscript.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Aliana Rodriguez Acevedo: Writing – original draft, Formal anal­
ysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Scott D. Slotnick: Writing –
review & editing, Formal analysis. Brittany M. Jeye: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jml.2025.104714.

8

A.R. Acevedo et al.

Journal of Memory and Language 146 (2026) 104714

