Introduction
Every day, we are surrounded by visual stimuli alongside linguisti­
cally encoded information in spoken or written form. Most, if not all,
linguistic processes are situated in an environment with a visual
component: whether engaged in a conversation in a crowded café,
watching a video with voice-over, or reading a newspaper on the subway
– these are all prime examples of highly cross-modal experiences
wherein information is concurrently encoded both visually and
linguistically.
Research on language processing across the lifespan has sought to
identify which aspects of language may change during aging, and
whether these changes manifest as improvements or declines (Nyberg
et al., 2012; Reifegerste et al., 2022; Rey-Mermet & Gade, 2018;
Sánchez-Izquierdo & Fernández-Ballesteros, 2021). Moreover, the
developmental trajectories of cognitive skills underlying specific lin­
guistic processes may indeed mediate age-related changes in language
processing.
Generally, lexical-retrieval difficulties are considered a hallmark of
aging (see, e.g., Connor et al., 2004; Verhaegen & Poncelet, 2013), while

the evidence for declines in other language domains, such as syntax, is
more mixed (Campbell et al., 2016; Hardy et al., 2020; Poulisse et al.,
2019). Furthermore, it appears that when non-syntactic cues (e.g.,
plausibility) support the linguistically encoded interpretation of a sen­
tence, comprehension performance in older and younger adults is
comparable (Amichetti et al., 2016; Caplan & Waters, 2005; Campbell
et al., 2016), suggesting that access to information from non-syntactic
sources may remain relatively stable throughout the lifespan. One pro­
posed explanation for this stability involves an age-related shift in the
information sources (or “heuristics”) that older adults rely on during
sentence comprehension (Beese et al., 2019; Stine-Morrow & Radvan­
sky, 2017; van Boxtel & Lawyer, 2021). However, there is little research
examining whether such a ‘syntactic-to-semantic-processing strategy
shift’ (Beese, et al., 2019) extends to the use of visual information.
In the remainder of the Introduction, we describe theoretical ac­
counts of the interaction of utterance and scene during visually situated
comprehension. We then briefly review research on the processing
heuristics used during sentence comprehension across the adult lifespan
and on the role of perceptual and visual information in older adults’
sentence comprehension, before turning to the present study.

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: zona@uni-potsdam.de (C.I. Zona).
1
Present address: Carlotta Isabella Zona, Potsdam Embodied Cognition Group, University of Potsdam, Building 14, room 6.22, Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, 14476,
Potsdam, Germany.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2024.104576
Received 14 February 2024; Received in revised form 17 August 2024; Accepted 2 October 2024
Available online 10 October 2024
0749-596X/© 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

Models of visually situated sentence comprehension

et al., 2012; Eiteljoerge et al., 2019; Tomasello et al., 2007; Wellsby &
Pexman, 2014), few studies have examined visually situated language in
aging (see Münster & Knoeferle, 2017).

Research on ‘situated’ language processing has considered language
as naturally immersed in a visual environment (Knoeferle, 2019). The
Constituent Comparison Model (CCM; Carpenter & Just, 1975) and the
“CACTRAS” model (Clark & Chase, 1972; Trabasso et al., 1971) are early
models of visuo-linguistic integration proposed to account for responsetime patterns of sentence-picture verification (Clark & Chase, 1972;
Wannemacher, 1974). In this paradigm, participants respond to ques­
tions such as Is this sentence true for this picture? Typically, congruent (i.
e., yes) trials are responded to faster than incongruent trials. To explain
this finding, these early models proposed that both sentences and de­
pictions are represented as propositional constituents. During sentencepicture verification, visual and linguistic constituents are verified
against each other (cf. the notion of spatial structure in Jackendoff,
2002); the detection of incongruence between the two components
triggers the re-initiation of the verification process, resulting in longer
response times for incongruent trials (Carpenter & Just, 1975).
The advent of on-line methodologies enabled researchers to inves­
tigate the time course of the integration of visual and linguistic infor­
mation during language processing (Spivey & Huette, 2016). The study
of attention allocation, for example using the visual-world eye-tracking
paradigm, has informed our understanding of the timing of linguistic
processing. This method assumes that linguistic processing immediately
directs the language user’s attention to visually available entities
(Cooper, 1974). In turn, visual information has been shown to exhibit a
pervasive influence on sentence processing, for example, for the reso­
lution of referential (Sedivy et al., 1999; Spivey et al., 2002; Tanenhaus
et al., 1995) and thematic-role ambiguities (Knoeferle et al., 2005;
Knoeferle & Crocker, 2006). For instance, the difficulty associated with
the processing of temporarily ambiguous instructions (e.g., Put the apple
on the towel in the box) was shown to be influenced by the visual display –
for example, whether one or two apples were presented visually
(Tanenhaus et al., 1995). Importantly, and of relevance for the present
paper, visual information has also been shown to interact with
morphological-case processing for (predictive) thematic-role assign­
ment (e.g., Kamide et al., 2003; Knoeferle et al., 2005; Knoeferle &
Crocker, 2005, 2006). For instance, Knoeferle et al. (2005) monitored
eye movements to visual scenes while participants listened to German
Subject-Verb-Object/Object-Verb-Subject sentences, which are initially
locally ambiguous regarding their thematic-role assignment (e.g., Die
Prinzessin malt gleich den Fechter, "The princess.NOM/ACC will soon
paint the.ACC fencer", i.e., "The princess will soon paint the fencer").
Crucially, the princess was depicted either as painting a character and as
being washed by another character. Participants used visual cues (the
princess as agent of the painting action) to infer the upcoming referent
(the fencer) at the verb, that is, before encountering the disambiguating
case marker on the second NP’s determiner.
The Coordinated Interplay Account (CIA; Knoeferle and Crocker,
2006) offers a theoretical framework accounting for the mutual influ­
ence of visual and linguistic information during utterance comprehen­
sion. This model outlines a cyclic mechanism: Initially, as utterances are
understood, the currently preferred interpretation of the sentence guides
visual attention to the relevant entities in the environment. Then, ut­
terance interpretation and visual entities are verified against each other,
potentially leading to revisions of the interpretation based on the visual
input. This interpretation is then used to form further expectations about
upcoming items. Throughout this cycle, currently relevant information
(e.g., prior context and visual entities) is stored in working memory
(WM) and updated as the speech progresses and/or the display changes.
While most prior work has focused on the time course of visuolinguistic integration, its consequences for thematic-role comprehen­
sion have been investigated to a considerably lesser extent (Knoeferle
et al., 2014; but see Kreysa et al., 2018; Zona & Felser, 2023). In addi­
tion, whereas the interaction between language and visual cues during
early developmental stages has received extensive attention (Borovsky

Heuristics for sentence comprehension in healthy aging
Findings regarding the effects of aging on syntactic comprehension
are somewhat mixed. While some studies have reported age-related
performance declines in sentence comprehension (e.g., Christianson
et al., 2006; Poulisse et al., 2019), these may be confined to conditions of
increased task demands (Beese et al., 2019; Reifegerste & Felser, 2017)
or to participants with lower WM capacity (Peelle et al., 2010; StineMorrow et al., 2000; Reifegerste et al., 2017). Instead, some studies
have found no age-related changes in syntactic processing, such as in
younger and older individuals’ ability to revise interpretations based on
agreement cues (Samu et al., 2017), or their propensity to develop
syntactically and semantically coherent sentential representations
(Davis et al., 2014; Tyler et al., 2010).
For instance, Alatorre-Cruz et al. (2018) tested 30 younger and 30
older adults (mean ages = 25.7 and 66.1 years, respectively) with a
grammaticality-judgement task targeting adjective-noun gender agree­
ment in Spanish, manipulating the length of the crucial adjective-noun
dependency to examine the role of WM load. Older participants per­
formed more slowly than younger participants, but both groups showed
comparable accuracy rates, regardless of dependency length. In another
study, Reifegerste et al. (2017, Exp. 2) asked 32 younger and 32 older
adults (mean ages = 24.4 and 66.8, respectively) to perform grammat­
icality judgments on written sentences containing agreement errors (e.
g., *The letter to the friends were sent today). Older participants were less
accurate than younger adults at noticing these agreement errors and
showed disproportionate reading slow-downs at the critical word con­
taining the error; importantly, both of these effects were driven by older
participants’ WM capacity, with the effects being greatest for older in­
dividuals with lower WM and comparable performance between
younger adults and older adults with higher WM. Lastly, Fernandes et al.
(2024) administered a spoken word-monitoring task in which 40
younger and 40 older adults (mean ages = 23.1 and 69.6 years,
respectively) listened to sentences and word strings that provided either
high constraint (based on both semantics and syntax; I flipped the pan­
cake with the spatula), low constraint (based only on syntax; I tried to
quickly find the spatula), or no constraint (words in pseudorandom order;
*Tried I find to quickly the spatula) for the word-monitoring task. The
authors reported no age differences in the benefits conferred via syn­
tactic (vs. no) constraints, indicating that both younger and older adults
exploited syntactic cues to predict the category of the upcoming word.
Importantly, older participants tended to outperform the younger group
in the high-constraint condition, that is, when additional semantic cues
were available. This latter tendency suggests that the use of semantic
information during sentence processing is preserved in older adults, in
line with studies reporting lifespan changes in comprehenders’ reliance
on cues from different sources for text and sentence comprehension
(Kemtes & Kemper, 1997; Stine-Morrow et al., 1996).
Indeed, evidence suggests that older adults may rely on non-syntactic
cues during comprehension more than younger adults (e.g., Amichetti
et al., 2016, Exp. 1; Ayasse et al., 2021; Beese et al., 2019; Christianson
et al., 2006; Poulisse et al., 2019; Rangel Ferrari et al., 2019; Yoon et al.,
2015). For example, Beese et al. (2019; Exp. 2) compared younger and
older adults’ propensity to utilize morphosyntactic and semantic con­
straints during sentence comprehension. Participants were presented
with written sentences or word lists, both of which consisted of either
existing words or a mix of words and pseudowords, and then answered
questions probing serial order position of the words in the sentence/
word list they had just read (e.g., Did the word X come before the word Y?).
While older adults showed overall lower accuracy than younger adults
for words presented in sentences, no age differences in performance
emerged for word lists. Importantly, younger and older adults did not
2

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

differ in the extent to which meaningful words (vs. non-words) facili­
tated task performance, indicating that the ability to use semantic cues
for the task was preserved in older adults. Lopukhina et al. (2022) found
that older adults relied on semantic plausibility to a greater extent than
did younger adults and adolescents during sentence reading, while both
older and younger adults relied on syntactic attachment preferences to a
similar extent.
These findings suggest that the ability to make use of semantic in­
formation is at least preserved with increasing age, and it may become
more central to sentence comprehension, perhaps particularly so in the
face of age-related declines in cognitive capacity. Thus, older adults may
achieve sentence comprehension by relying increasingly on semantic
relations between different sentence elements (Taler et al., 2009),
plausibility (Amichetti et al., 2016), and other aspects of crystallized
knowledge (e.g., ‘verbal intelligence’; Campbell et al., 2016).
As for the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying such a hypothe­
sized shift in heuristic strategies for comprehension, one influential
proposal posits that older adults have reduced suppression of irrelevant
information due to age-related declines in the connectivity of the fron­
toparietal control network (Spreng et al., 2010; Campbell et al. 2012).
Such network supports enhancement of brain activity associated with
task-relevant information and the suppression of activity associated with
task-irrelevant information (Gazzaley et al., 2005). Older adults have
been found to exhibit preserved enhancement of brain activity associ­
ated with processing task-relevant information, while suppression of
activity related to task-irrelevant information was reduced in older
adults, and especially those exhibiting disproportional WM deficits
(Gazzaley, Cooney, Rissman & D’Esposito, 2005). During syntactic
parsing, this may cause age-related difficulties in controlling interfer­
ence from semantics- and inference-based interpretations that are stored
in WM but have been disconfirmed by morphosyntactic markers. For
example, when a noncanonical syntactic structure disconfirms the
expectation for a canonical structure, older adults may have greater
difficulties inhibiting the previously preferred canonical interpretation
than younger adults. This line of research has also highlighted how
enhanced susceptibility to distracting information need not be a disad­
vantage, but it can also manifest as a benefit depending on the situation
(Healey et al., 2008). Indeed, semantic and word-order information is
often not irrelevant and relying on it can aid successful comprehension
by contributing to “filling the gaps”, especially in situations that are
taxing for WM and interference control (IC). As suggested by StineMorrow (2007), age-related shifts in heuristic strategies underlying
comprehension may be finely tuned to achieve comprehension in the
face of age-related cognitive declines in WM and IC abilities.
For example, studies have shown greater advantages from a match­
ing (vs. mismatching) visual depiction latencies of lexical processing in
older (vs. younger) adults (Dijkstra et al., 2004; Madden and Dijkstra,
2010), suggesting that the interference from task-irrelevant perceptual
features may increase with increasing age, and that this may be helpful
for task performance (see also Radvansky et al., 2001). Other evidence,
however, has suggested that visuo-linguistic integration may represent a
burden on older adults’ cognitive resources. Stine et al. (1990)
compared free recall of spoken excerpts from television news broadcasts
presented to 12 younger and 12 older adults (mean ages 18 and 68,
respectively) either in isolation, alongside the corresponding video
component, or alongside a written transcript of the excerpt. Of relevance
here, younger participants’ recall was aided when the spoken informa­
tion was augmented by video or transcript, indicating that visual in­
formation facilitated younger adults’ recall of spoken language. In
contrast, older adults did not benefit from either the video or the written
transcript. Interestingly, comprehension differences between the age
groups in the audio-only condition disappeared once participants’ WM
capacity was considered. This latter result suggests that changes in
cognitive abilities – rather than aging per se – play a crucial role in the
comprehension of spoken sentences presented in isolation.
To summarize, evidence on the integration of visual and linguistic

cues for comprehension across the adult lifespan is scarce; moreover,
this work has thus far focused on lexical processing, and we are not
aware of any research that has examined the role of visual information
for syntactic comprehension in aging. Additionally, previous studies
have typically operationalized age as a categorical variable, contrasting
(often relatively small) groups of younger/older adults. The present
study seeks to address these gaps by investigating changes in syntactic
comprehension, as well as in the use of visual-scene information, in a
continuous-age sample (n = 153, age range = 18–70 years).
The present study
We investigated whether visual information benefits spoken sen­
tence comprehension, and whether the size of such a benefit changes
across the lifespan and/or as a function of varying levels of cognitive
ability. We employed a 2 × 2 design with Sentence Structure (2 levels:
subject-object, object-subject) and Visual Scene (2 levels: baseline, vi­
sual scene) as within-participant factors. Participants listened to 24
spoken sentences presented either in isolation (baseline) or alongside a
photo of two characters acting out the action described by the sentence
(visual scene) and were asked to respond to comprehension questions
targeting agent identification.
Subject-object (SO) and object-subject (OS) structures were subjectand object-extracted relative clauses (e.g., SO: Das ist der Koch, der die
Braut verfolgt “This is the cook who follows the bride”; OS: Das ist der
Koch, den die Braut verfolgt “This is the cook whom the bride follows”)
used to model conditions of increased task demands, based on extensive
evidence indicating greater processing difficulty for and less accurate
comprehension of noncanonical OS (vs. canonical SO) relative-clause
structures (including in German; Adelt et al., 2017; Mecklinger et al.,
1995; Schriefers et al., 1995; Vos et al., 2001), and particularly so at
older ages (e.g., Kemper & Liu, 2007; Obler et al., 1991; Stine-Morrow
et al., 2000; Tun et al., 2009; Wingfield et al., 2003). We thus hypoth­
esized that OS (vs. SO) clause structures would be associated with poorer
comprehension performance (main effect of Sentence Structure), and
perhaps particularly so at older ages (Sentence Structure × Age
interaction).
The interplay of WM and Interference Control (IC) has been argued
to contribute to an individual’s ability to maintain task-related goals
(Duell et al., 2018; Egner & Hirsch, 2005; Long & Prat, 2002; Miller &
Cohen, 2001; Weldon et al., 2013), including specifically for the
comprehension of object-extracted relative clauses in older adults (e.g.,
Goral et al., 2011; Gordon et al., 2002; King & Just, 1991). This is
because comprehenders of German assume that the first-mentioned
referent in an utterance will take on the agent (rather than the pa­
tient) role of an upcoming action (e.g., Schriefers et al., 1995).
Encountering a relative pronoun in the accusative (den “whom,” vs.
nominative, der “who”) form, as is the case in object-extracted relative
clauses, disconfirms this expectation and requires participants to revise
their preferred interpretation based on the case information. Such dis­
confirmation engenders more interference as compared to subjectextracted clauses, in which the previously held interpretation is
endorsed by the case information and no revision takes place. The ability
to control interference from competing representations is then relevant
for determining the amount and accuracy of the information that will be
stored in WM. In turn, individual WM capacity will determine how well
such interference-control mechanisms need to operate to support the
comprehension of more complex syntax. To quantify these abilities in
our sample, we computed a composite score of cognitive ability for each
participant by averaging across their z-transformed WM scores and IC
scores, providing an individual proxy of cognitive-ability levels. This
approach also allowed us to keep as few collinear predictors as possible
in our statistical models. Greater cognitive abilities are expected to be
associated with better comprehension performance across the lifespan
(main effect of Cognitive Score). Moreover, if our sentence-structure
manipulation increases cognitive task demands, we might expect
3

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

individuals at the lower end of the cognitive-ability range to be more
greatly affected by this manipulation than those at the higher end
(Sentence Structure × Cognitive Score interaction).
If increasing age yields declines in sentence comprehension, we
should observe a main effect of Age yielding poorer performance across
the cognitive-ability range, and potentially an interaction between
Sentence Structure and Age, indicating that the detrimental effects of
increasing age on comprehension performance might be more promi­
nent in response to noncanonical OS structures. Further, if such agerelated declines are modulated by changes in cognitive abilities
throughout the lifespan, age effects on comprehension might emerge
only in individuals with relatively lower cognitive abilities (Age ×
Cognitive Score interaction). This further prediction is in line with
previous evidence for age-related declines in situations of increased
demands and/or lower abilities to overcome such demands (e.g., Rei­
fegerste et al., 2017).
Turning to the visual scenes, we hypothesized that supporting visual
information might yield overall improvements in sentence comprehen­
sion (a main effect of Visual Scene), in line with predictions from the CIA
and with previous studies that reported a benefit of matching visual
information for lexical processing in both younger and older adults
(Dijkstra et al., 2004; Madden & Dijkstra, 2010). Further, the benefits of
visual information may become more evident for the comprehension of
OS (vs. SO) structures (Sentence Structure × Visual Scene interaction),
given the relatively greater syntactic complexity of the former versus the
latter. For example, Knoeferle and Kreysa (2012) used visual-world eyetracking to investigate how comprehenders use deictic visual informa­
tion (e.g., a speaker’s gaze directed towards the depiction of an up­
coming sentence referent) to predict this referent. The authors found
that visual cues enabled participants to accurately predict the upcoming
referent in response to both SO and OS clause structures; while a base­
line condition without deictic information yielded SO-OS differences in
fixation latencies, this effect was neutralized in the presence of deictic
cues.
Turning to the interactive effects of age, based on prior studies that
reported evidence for a heuristic shift in older adults’ sentence
comprehension (from reliance on syntax to inference- and context-based
reasoning), we explored whether this general pattern extends to agerelated increases in reliance on visual-scene information. Thus, we hy­
pothesized that the facilitatory role of visual information may become
more pronounced with increasing age (Visual Scene × Age interaction).
Lastly, we also investigated the role of varying cognitive-ability
levels in determining potential heuristic shifts, examining the hypoth­
esis that visual-scene information might support comprehension per­
formance particularly (or possibly exclusively) in situations of increased
cognitive demands – that is, in response to noncanonical OS (vs. ca­
nonical SO) structures (Sentence Structure × Visual Scene interaction),
and/or in individuals with lower (vs. higher) cognitive abilities (Visual
Scene × Cognitive Score interaction).

normal vision (including intact colour vision). A computer-based
adaptation of the German version of the Montreal Cognitive Assess­
ment (MoCA; Nasreddine et al., 2005; German version: Thomann et al.,
2018) was administered to limit the inclusion of participants with signs
of age-related neurological impairment. No participants were excluded
as a result of this screening, as all participants scored at least 26 out of 30
points. MoCA scores were not considered in further analyses. Additional
participant information is reported in Table 1, and the sample’s distri­
bution over the age range is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Materials
The linguistic stimuli comprised spoken sentences recorded by a fe­
male native speaker of German. The target sentences consisted of cop­
ular sentences with a defining relative clause (see Table 2). The main
clause introduced a human male referent, followed by a relative clause
introducing a human female referent and a transitive verb. All referents
(both in the main clause and the relative clause) were common nouns
denoting professions (e.g., der Koch “the cook”) or ranks of nobility (e.g.,
die Prinzessin “the princess”) that have gender-specific terms in German
(e.g., der Koch vs. die Köchin “the cook”Masc vs. “the cook”Fem), or
otherwise stereotypically gendered terms (e.g., die Braut “the bride”),
and had masculine and feminine gender, respectively. To manipulate
syntactic structure, half of the relative pronouns were in nominative
case (der “who”Masc) and half in accusative case (den “whom”Masc),
thereby forming subject-object-verb (SO) and object-subject-verb (OS)
relative clauses, respectively. Only masculine nouns were included as
pronoun antecedents because masculine singular pronouns always allow
for unambiguous thematic role assignment in German, while feminine
and neuter relative pronouns as well as plurals can render sentences
ambiguous due to case syncretism.
Each presentation list consisted of eight practice items, 24 target
items, and 60 fillers (n = 92). An additional 56 items that were part of
another project were intermixed with the other items; these are not
discussed here. Thus, 148 items were presented in total. To deter par­
ticipants from relying only on the visual scenes and responding without
parsing the sentence, half of the visual scenes of filler trials depicted the
sentence incorrectly. Sentence-picture incongruence in these items was
realized in terms of the depicted action (n = 8), action direction (n = 12),
or number/location mismatches (n = 8). All visual scenes depicted only
the referents mentioned in the sentence. Item order within each list was
fully randomized for each participant.
Half of the spoken sentences were presented in isolation, and half
alongside visual-scene depictions (see Table 2, “Visual Scene”). De­
pictions consisted of photos of Playmobil© figurines performing actions,
against a white background. The photos were taken in a well-lit room
with a Canon EOS 40D digital camera and subsequently edited using the
open-source software GIMP (GNU Image Manipulation Program) soft­
ware (version 2.10.20; The GIMP Development Team, 2019). All pic­
tures were cropped to a 1:1 width-to-height ratio, and their visual
features were kept as similar as possible across the different conditions
(e.g., characters’ size and location on the screen, their respective posi­
tion, brightness, saturation of colour features, etc). Following each
sentence presentation, participants saw a written probe question (in the
passive voice) targeting agent identification (see Table 2, “Probe”). Half
of the questions referred to the male and half to the female character.
Half of the questions required a yes and half a no response.

Methods
Participants
Participants were recruited through multiple channels, including the
online participant recruitment platform of the University of Potsdam,
web-based ads across Germany, and by directly contacting participants
from previous experiments. All participants provided informed consent
to participate in the study and received 10€/h or university credit as
compensation.
The final dataset included 153 participants, 99 women and 54 men,
ranging between 18 and 70 years of age. All participants were native
speakers of German and had not learned another language before the
age of 5. Participants had received formal education in German for an
average of 16 years (SD: 3, range: 7–25) and reported no perceptual,
cognitive, or language-related impairments, and normal or corrected-to-

Procedure
Testing was conducted fully remotely due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
The experiment was programmed in E-Prime 3.0 (Psychology Software
Tools Inc., 2016) and conducted remotely through E-Prime Go 1.0
(Psychology Software Tools Inc., 2020). Prior to the experiment, all
participants completed a demographic questionnaire, providing infor­
mation on their gender, date of birth, education (in years), native
4

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

Table 1
Participant information by decade (means and SDs). WM and Stroop scores z-transformed and centred around their means. ‘Cognitive Score’ was computed by
averaging across z-transformed WM and Stroop scores (and thus also represents a z-transformed score).
Age
Decade

n

Gender

Age in years
(SD)

Education in years
(SD)

Cognitive Score
(SD)

Z-transformed WM score
(SD)

Z-transformed Interference control score
(SD)

18–29
30–39
40–49
50–59
60–70
Total

42
21
32
26
32
153

33F, 9 M
16F, 5 M
21F, 11 M
14F, 12 M
15F, 17 M
99F, 54 M

22 (3.16)
34 (2.94)
43 (2.97)
55 (3.43)
64 (2.86)
44 (16.05)

14 (3.10)
18 (2.60)
17 (3.26)
16 (2.78)
15 (3.03)
16 (3.35)

0.39 (0.50)
0.17 (0.74)
− 0.18 (0.96)
− 0.19 (0.76)
− 0.13 (0.75)
0 (0.78)

0.38 (0.48)
0.26 (0.82)
− 0.11 (1.18)
− 0.20 (1.12)
− 0.19 (1.03)
0 (0.98)

0.39 (0.83)
0.08 (1.00)
− 0.25 (1.13)
− 0.18 (0.76)
− 0.06 (1.05)
0 (0.99)

Note. Gender: F = female, M = male.

Fig. 1. Number of participants by age and by gender.

language, other languages spoken (specifying age-of-acquisition and
acquisition context), handedness, vision/hearing deficits, and (past or
current) language-related/cognitive/neurological impairments.
Task administration was arranged in two parts. The first part
included the MoCA, a Stroop task (measuring IC), and a 1-back task
(measuring WM span), presented to each participant in random order.
The tasks were presented in black text against a white background in
Consolas font size 18. The second part comprised the sentencecomprehension task. Participants were allowed to take a break be­
tween cognitive-task and sentence-comprehension parts. The duration
of the experiment was approximately 25 min.

by subtracting score in the “word” condition from the score in the
“color”-condition. Lastly, scores were reversed for clarity, such that
higher scores correspond to better IC ability.
N-back task
The n-back task was presented in three conditions in ascending
order: 0-back, 1-back, 2-back. In this task, participants saw a series of
letters and indicated whether each character was identical to a) a pre­
defined character (e.g., z; 0-back), b) the character presented in the
previous trial (1-back), or c) the character presented two trials earlier (2back). Participants had 500 ms to respond to each character, after which
a fixation cross appeared on the screen for 500 ms. The total duration of
this task was about seven minutes. WM scores were computed by
dividing mean latency by mean accuracy as described above. Scores
were then reversed for clarity, such that higher scores represent better
WM capacities. Due to ceiling and floor effects in the 0-back and 2-back
conditions, respectively, only trials from the 1-back tasks were used to
compute WM scores (see Pelegrina et al., 2015).

Cognitive tasks
Victoria Stroop test
In this version of the Stroop test, participants saw words that
appeared in isolation in the center of the screen and were asked to
indicate (by keystroke) the ink color of each word. Items belonged to one
of three conditions: a) “x” condition (xxxx); b) “word” condition (e.g.,
vorn “in front”); c) “color” condition (e.g., gelb “yellow”). Key-color
mappings were shown on-screen throughout the task. The task was
untimed, and its total duration was about five minutes. Efficiency scores
for “word”- and “color”-conditions were computed by dividing each
participant’s mean response time to correctly answered trials by the
proportion of accurately answered trials. Then, IC scores were obtained

Sentence-comprehension task
Each trial in the sentence-comprehension tasks consisted of two steps
(see Table 2): during the first slide, participants heard a spoken sentence;
the second slide presented a written binary forced-choice probe question
that participants were asked to answer through keypress on the
5

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

Table 2
Experimental design and example stimuli.
Condition

First slide
Sentence

SO, baseline

Das ist der Koch, der die Braut verfolgt
“This is the cook who follows the bride”

Visual Scene

Second slide
Probe
Wird die Braut verfolgt? / Wird der Koch verfolgt?
“Is the bride being followed?” / “Is the cook being followed?”

SO, scene

OS, baseline

Das ist der Koch, den die Braut verfolgt
“This is the cook whom the bride follows”

OS, scene

keyboard within 4000 ms (left-hand side: “Yes”; right-hand side: “No”;
reminders of which key corresponds to which response remained onscreen throughout the task).

Structure, Visual Scene, Cognitive Score, and their interactions as fixed
factors. Using a composite score for cognitive ability enabled us to
decrease the number of collinear predictors as compared to the model
including both WM and IC scores alongside age (see, e.g., Yoo et al.,
2014).
In the initial model, the Sentence-Structure factor was sum-coded
(SO: − 0.5, OS: 0.5) and the Visual-Scene factor was treatment-coded
(Baseline: 0, Visual Scene: 1). Thus, the intercept represents the
average efficiency scores in response to Baseline conditions across clause
types. The random-effects structure included by-item intercepts, by-item
slopes for the effect of Cognitive Score, by-participant intercepts and
slope adjustments for Sentence Structure, Visual Scene, Sentence
Structure by Visual Scene, and Correct Response (i.e., whether the
comprehension question required a Yes or No response).

Data analysis
We computed Inverse Efficiency Scores (IES, Townsend & Ashby,
1978; 1983) by dividing each participant’s response time for each
correctly answered trial by their mean accuracy in that trial’s condition.
IES were computed for each trial separately (rather than by condition),
thus keeping the data in non-aggregated form to avoid loss in statistical
power (Barr, 2008; Schad et al., 2022). IES account for both latency and
accuracy of responses within the same performance index (Bruyer &
Brysbaert, 2011; Vandierendonck, 2018) and are an effective measure of
overall task efficiency to quantify age-related changes in visuo-motor
and language tasks (e.g., Reifegerste, 2024; Reifegerste et al., 2020;
Statsenko et al., 2020). IES were reversed for clarity, such that higher
scores correspond to better performance (“efficiency scores”
henceforth).
All analyses were performed in R 2021.09.0 (RStudio Team, 2021).
Efficiency scores were analyzed with linear mixed-effects regression
models. All continuous predictors were centered around their mean. Pvalues were obtained from t-tests (degrees of freedom = difference be­
tween the number of observations and the number of fixed effects esti­
mates in the model; Baayen et al., 2008). Following previous research (e.
g., Connor et al., 2004; Reifegerste et al., 2021; Veríssimo et al., 2022),
we also tested for non-linear effects of Age. Since no significant
quadratic or cubic effects of Age emerged, higher-order polynomials
were not tested for inclusion.
All regression analyses were carried out with the lme4 R package
(Bates et al., 2015), and figures based on model estimates were plotted
using the ggplot2 (Wickham, 2016) and sjPlot packages (Lüdecke, 2018).
Where relevant, p values were adjusted with the Tukey method for a
family of several estimates.
The linear mixed-effects regression model included Age, Sentence

Results
Descriptive results
Fig. 2 displays by-participant response times, accuracy, and effi­
ciency scores by condition for each age decade. Pearson’s productmoment correlation tests revealed that age and IC correlated nega­
tively, as did age and WM capacity (see Table 3 and Fig. 3a-c). WM and
IC correlated positively, in line with prior work (e.g., Morey et al.,
2012). The composite cognitive-ability scores (i.e., the average of the ztransformed n-back and Stroop scores) showed strong positive correla­
tions with IC and WM, and a negative correlation with age (Table 3,
Fig. 3d-f).
Inferential statistics
Table 4 reports the number of correctly and incorrectly answered
trials by Sentence Structure in each decade. Table 5 reports the results
from the linear mixed-effects regression model fit to the data.
We detected significant effects of all fixed factors except for Age. The
6

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Fig. 2. Descriptive plots: Mean agent-identification Accuracy rates (top left), Response Times (top right) and Efficiency Scores (bottom) by condition by age. The
boxes correspond to first and third quantiles of the distribution. Whiskers represent the location of the largest and lowest observed values (within 1.5 times the
interquantile range)

effect of Sentence Structure indicated that OS clauses were associated
with worse performance than the average of both clause types in Base­
line trials. An effect of Visual Scene revealed that performance was
higher in response to sentences presented with visual scenes versus in
isolation. In addition, the effect of Cognitive Score indicated that higher
cognitive abilities were associated with better comprehension perfor­
mance in Baseline trials. These main effects were qualified by several
interactions.
First, a significant interaction of Sentence Structure × Visual Scene
indicated that the difficulty associated with the comprehension of
noncanonical OS clauses (i.e., the main effect of Sentence Structure in
Baseline trials) was significantly smaller when a visual scene was

Table 3
Correlations of age, WM score, Stroop score, and cognitive score.
Variables

Correlation
Coefficient

P Value

T Value

Age ~ WM
Age ~ Interference Control
WM ~ Interference Control
Cognitive score ~ WM
Cognitive score ~ Interference
Control
Cognitive score ~ Age

− .222
− .201
.258
.793
.793

.006
.012
.001
<.001
<.001

− 2.81
− 2.53
3.30
16.10
16.10

− .266

.001

− 3.42

7

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

Fig. 3. Correlations of individual-level variables. All correlations were significant (ps ≤ .013). Each dot represents one participant. Dots are colored by age, with
darker dots corresponding to younger age.

presented alongside the utterance. Second, greater Cognitive Scores
were associated with particularly better performance in response to
noncanonical OS clauses (vs. the average of both clause structures)
(Sentence Structure × Cognitive Score interaction), and even more so
when compared to OS utterances presented in isolation (Sentence
Structure × Visual Scene × Cognitive Score interaction). Together, these

patterns suggest that visual scenes were particularly helpful for
comprehension in situations of greater task demands, such as when
encountering noncanonical (vs. canonical) structures and/or for in­
dividuals with lower cognitive abilities.
Lastly, we found a nearly significant three-way interaction between
Sentence Structure, Cognitive Score, and Age; this marginal effect
8

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

indicated that increasing age was associated with smaller SO-OS dif­
ferences (i.e., smaller effects of Sentence Structure) in individuals with
higher cognitive-ability levels – but only when utterances were pre­
sented in isolation.
To follow up on both three-way interactions, Sentence Structure was
re-coded with treatment contrasts (i.e., SO structures were coded as
0 and OS structures as 1) and the model was re-fitted to provide slope
estimates for each level of Sentence Structure separately. The effect of
Cognitive Score was assessed by changing treatment-coding weights for
the Visual Scene factor (Tables S1 and S2 in Supplementary Materials).

Table 4
Number of correctly answered trials by Sentence Structure in each decade.
Accuracy

Sentence Structure

18–29

30–39

40–49

50–59

60–70

Inaccurate
Accurate
Inaccurate
Accurate

SO
SO
OS
OS

72
645
194
522

38
323
113
238

77
487
136
427

42
416
67
391

75
486
127
429

Table 5
Coefficients of fixed and random effects of the linear regression fitted to efficiency scores. Sentence Structure was sum-coded with 0.5 weights (SO: − 0.5, OS: 0.5) to
index the effect of an OS structure compared to the mean of both SO and OS structures. Visual Scene was treatment-coded to compare the presence of a Scene (coded as
1) to the Baseline (coded as 0). Thus, the intercept represents the mean efficiency score in Baseline conditions across both Sentence-Structure levels and at the mean
values of Age and Cognitive Score.
Predictor

Estimate

Std. Error

t value

p value

(Intercept)
Sentence Structure
Visual Scene
Age
Cognitive Score
Sentence Structure £ Visual Scene
Sentence Structure × Age
Visual Scene × Age
Sentence Structure £ Cognitive Score
Visual Scene × Cognitive Score
Cognitive Score × Age
Sentence Structure × Visual Scene × Age
Sentence Structure £ Visual Scene £ Cognitive Score
Sentence Structure £ Cognitive Score £ Age
Visual Scene × Cognitive Score × Age
Sentence Structure × Visual Scene × Cognitive Score × Age
Random effects
Name
Subject
(Intercept)
​
Sentence Structure
​
Visual Scene
​
Correct Response
​
Sentence Structure × Visual Scene
Item
(Intercept)
​
Cognitive Score
Residual
​

3.40
¡0.21
0.11
<0.01
0.07
0.09
<0.01
<0.01
0.13
− 0.03
<0.01
<0.01
¡0.15
0.01
<0.01
<0.01
Variance
0.05
0.14
0.03
<0.01
0.20
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

0.02
0.03
0.02
<0.01
0.02
0.04
<0.01
<0.01
0.04
0.02
<0.01
<0.01
0.05
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
Correlation

150.15
¡6.29
6.01
0.03
2.96
2.29
1.67
0.87
3.24
− 1.22
0.04
− 0.29
¡3.02
1.95
0.08
− 1.06

<.001
<.001
<.001
.978
.004
.023
.096
.386
.001
.225
.971
.775
.003
.053
.936
.290

​

​

​

​

​

​

​
​

​

SD
0.22
0.38
0.18
0.01
0.45
0.01
<0.01
0.11

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​

.51
− .63
.02
− .36

− .40
.08
− .69

​

− .18
.58
​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

.03

​

− .65
​

​

Fig. 4. Linear regression predicted values for Sentence Structure × Visual Scene × Cognitive Score on efficiency. Dashed and solid lines represent mean efficiency
(solid: canonical SO sentences, dashed: noncanonical OS sentences) and the shaded bands represent 95 % confidence intervals.
9

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

ist der Koch, den die Braut verfolgt "This is the cook whom the bride fol­
lows") presented either in isolation or alongside an image depicting the
scene, and answered binary questions targeting agent identification (e.
g., Wird die Braut verfolgt? "Is the bride being followed?"). Our results
showed that:

In Baseline conditions, we did not find an effect of Cognitive Score on
comprehension of SO structures (t = 0.13, p = .898), while increasing
Cognitive Scores were associated with significantly better comprehen­
sion of OS structures (t = 3.25, p = .001). In Visual-Scene conditions,
increasing Cognitive Scores were associated with smaller but significant
performance increases (t = 2.39, p = .018) regardless of Sentence
Structure (Fig. 4).
Turning to the Sentence Structure × Cognitive Score × Age inter­
action (Fig. 5), increasing age showed a marginal tendency to be asso­
ciated with poorer performance in individuals with higher cognitive
scores in Baseline SO conditions (t = -1.78, p = .077). Instead, increasing
age tended to improve performance in individuals with higher cognitive
scores responding to Baseline OS trials (t = 1.95, p = .095). In younger
participants (e.g., the lower quartile of the age range, Fig. 5, left),
increasing cognitive-ability levels led to similar performance increases
in response to canonical and noncanonical sentences. In the median
quartile (Fig. 5, center), increasing cognitive-ability levels led to per­
formance increases only in response to noncanonical sentences. In the
upper quartile (Fig. 5, right), increasing cognitive-ability levels led to
performance increases in response to noncanonical sentences and de­
creases in response to canonical sentences. We discuss these patterns
below. The Age × Cognitive Score interaction was non-significant in
either Visual Scene condition, suggesting that the visual cues rendered
cognitive-ability levels less central to successful performance.
Finally, we investigated whether the effects of WM and IC on per­
formance were dissociable from one another. A model was fitted
including the interactions of 1) Sentence Structure, Visual Scene, and
WM score, 2) Sentence Structure, Visual Scene, and IC score, 3) Sentence
Structure, Age, and WM score, and 4) Sentence Structure, Age and IC
score; see Table S3 in Supplementary Materials. This latter model
exhibited numerically worse AIC and BIC compared to the model
including composite Cognitive Scores.

• Visual-scene information benefited comprehension performance,
especially in response to noncanonical structures. This interaction
was modulated by cognitive-ability levels, rather than by age.
• Age-related changes in comprehension performance tended to be
modulated by individual levels of cognitive ability: increasing age
was associated with marginally greater benefits from increasing
cognitive-ability levels in response to noncanonical (but not canon­
ical) sentences.
Our results indicated that spoken comprehension performance was
affected by the structural complexity of the relative clause (effects of
Sentence Structure), by whether it was accompanied by a visual scene
(effects of Visual Scene), and by participants’ performance in our
cognitive tasks tapping WM and IC (effects of Cognitive Score), both
additively and interactively. We discuss these effects in turn.
The results as to the effect of Sentence Structure closely align with
the assumption that noncanonical (vs. canonical) clause structures in­
crease sentence comprehension demands in German (Adelt et al., 2017;
Vos et al., 2001), which confirms the suitability of our sentence mate­
rials to manipulate syntactic complexity. In noncanonical clauses, a
superficial, frequency-based heuristic strategy – assigning the subject
role to the first-mentioned referent – supports an interpretation that is at
odds with an interpretation conveyed by the morphosyntactic markers,
which instead signal that the first-mentioned referent is in fact the object
of the relative clause (Ferreira et al., 2009, Karimi & Ferreira, 2016). In
contrast, canonical clauses do not entail competing representations from
word-order and morphosyntactic information, and the interpretation
can be derived with minimal cognitive conflict.
The findings as to the effect of Visual Scene support our hypothesis
that the availability of visual information benefits utterance compre­
hension compared to utterances presented in isolation. This result is in
line with current models of visuo-linguistic integration positing that the
contents of the visual display contribute to sentence interpretation
(Knoeferle & Crocker, 2006). Extending prior work on the time course of

Discussion
The current study investigated whether visual information benefits
syntactic comprehension across the adult lifespan and at varying levels
of cognitive abilities. Participants listened to canonical subject-object
(SO) and noncanonical object-subject (OS) clauses (e.g., Das ist der
Koch, der die Braut verfolgt "This is the cook who follows the bride" vs. Das

Fig. 5. Linear regression predicted values for Sentence Structure × Age × Cognitive Score on efficiency. Solid and dashed lines represent mean efficiency (solid:
canonical SO sentences,dashed: noncanonical OS sentences) and the shaded bands represent 95 % confidence intervals.
10

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

visuo-linguistic integration, the current results provide novel insights as
to its consequences, by showing beneficial effects of visual information
on the recall of thematic-role representations post-sentence. Addition­
ally, the interaction between Sentence Structure and Visual Scene
indicated that visual-scene information was particularly beneficial for
the comprehension of utterances containing noncanonical (vs. canoni­
cal) clauses. Such effect of visual cues can be explained in terms of the
visually conveyed thematic roles (contributing to) determining which
thematic-role configuration (i.e., action direction) is perceived as the
most likely to be expressed by the sentence. While the first-mentioned
referent is overwhelmingly assumed to take on the agent (vs. patient)
role of the action when utterances are presented in isolation, inspecting
a visual depiction in which the first-mentioned referent is taking on the
patient role increases the likelihood of the patient-first interpretation,
and may thus facilitate comprehension by rendering generally dis­
preferred configurations easier to predict, comprehend, and recall.
In their eye-tracking study, Knoeferle and Kreysa (2012) found that a
speaker’s gaze towards an upcoming sentence referent neutralized SOOS differences in fixation latencies; in contrast, in the current study
the presence of visual information yielded attenuated but still significant
SO-OS differences. This apparent discrepancy might be attributed to
differences in the tasks and visual stimuli used in the two studies. First,
the probe questions administered in the current study presented an
additional level of complexity as compared to oculomotor behavior
captured by eye-tracking. Indeed, the use of agent-identification ques­
tions has been criticized, as inaccurate responses may be caused not only
by erroneous representations formed during sentence processing, but
also by failures in the retrieval of accurate representations from memory
(Bader & Meng, 2023; Meng & Bader, 2021). Our results may thus
indicate that visual information supported the formation of more ac­
curate thematic-role representations, the retrieval of such representa­
tions, or both.
Second, unlike a speaker’s gaze, the visual information presented in
the present study was not deictic in nature, but rather conveyed meaning
semantically. Decoding semantic (vs. deictic) meaning is likely to be less
automatic, as it does not physically point to its referred meaning, which
might cause our visual scenes to be more effortful and less immediate to
integrate with representations conveyed by the utterance. For example,
Kamide et al. (2003, Exp. 2) tracked participants’ eye movements to­
wards non-deictic depictions of sentence referents while listening to
German SO/OS sentences (e.g., The hare will soon eat the cabbage).
Anticipatory fixations were detected only in response to SO structures.
This suggests that syntactic prediction preferences may be influenced by
semantic and deictic visual information to different degrees (see also
Kreysa et al., 2018). Against this background, the current study provides
evidence for a durable effect of the interaction of syntactic interpretation
preferences and (semantic) visual cues on thematic-role comprehension.
Importantly, both effects discussed so far (main effect of Sentence
Structure and Sentence Structure × Visual Scene interaction) were
further modulated by varying levels of cognitive abilities. A Sentence
Structure × Cognitive Score interaction revealed that greater cognitive
ability was particularly beneficial for performance with noncanonical
OS structures, compatible with the idea that canonical sentences
entailed little to no cognitive conflict, thus rendering individual
cognitive-ability levels less critical for successful comprehension.
Furthermore, the Sentence Structure × Cognitive Score interaction was
only detected when utterances were presented in isolation (Sentence
Structure × Visual Scene × Cognitive Score).
This pattern broadly supports previous work highlighting the role of
measures such as WM and IC for sentence comprehension, particularly
in the face of increased task demands (for a review, see Lau & Tanaka,
2021). It moreover underscores that the sentence-structure manipula­
tion effectively increased cognitive task demands, and that our com­
posite measure of cognitive ability was able to predict individual
differences in performance selectively in the more challenging
condition.

In response to noncanonical OS sentences, participants at the higher
end of the cognitive-score scale successfully made use of the morpho­
syntactic markers to achieve comprehension regardless of the visual
scene. In contrast, participants at the lower end of the cognitive-score
scale relied more prominently on the visual scenes to achieve compre­
hension of these more challenging syntactic constructions (Fig. 4).
Our findings indicate that cognitive skills such as WM and IC can
exert positive effects on sentence comprehension. These effects were
particularly pronounced in situations of greater task demand – such as
when the sentence is relatively more complex or when no other infor­
mation sources are available to guide sentence interpretation. Further,
the presence of visual information may alter comprehenders’ preference
for a thematic-role configuration over another – namely biasing
comprehension towards the visually conveyed interpretation of the ut­
terance. As a consequence, the conflict engendered by the personal
pronoun in accusative (den “whom,” vs. nominative, der “who”) is
significantly diminished, and thus participants do not need high levels of
cognitive abilities to resolve such conflict successfully.
We did not find conclusive effects of Age on comprehension, with
marginal decreases and increases for SO and OS sentences, respectively.
This is consistent with previous work showing only relatively small agerelated changes in syntactic comprehension, and with the results from
Stine et al. (1990), as changes in cognitive abilities, but not age, played a
central role in the comprehension of utterances in isolation. Given our
relatively young sample, which spanned until only 70 years of age, it is
also possible that declines in sentence comprehension may occur only at
later stages, as has been found for other aspects of language (e.g., vo­
cabulary size; Salthouse, 2010). Based on the proposal for a shift from
algorithmically to semantically derived representations with increasing
age, we had hypothesized that increasing age may be associated with
greater benefits from the presence of visual cues supporting compre­
hension. This hypothesis was not supported: We found that the presence
of visual cues benefited performance across the lifespan to a similar
extent. On the one hand, this evidence extends the applicability of the
CIA by demonstrating the validity of its claims in participants from
across the adult lifespan. On the other hand, we did find effects of
increasing age that were selective to Baseline trials and modulated by
varying cognitive-ability levels (Fig. 5): greater cognitive abilities were
more beneficial for the comprehension of noncanonical sentences in
older than in younger participants. In contrast, the pattern for canonical
sentences was somewhat puzzling, as the beneficial effects of increasing
Cognitive Scores on comprehension were limited to younger partici­
pants (i.e., lower age quartile) and reversed for older participants (upper
age quartile). One tentative explanation might be that older participants
with low cognitive-ability levels overwhelmingly responded to utter­
ances in isolation based on word order (rather than morphosyntactic
case markers), leading to the largest observed SO-OS differences. In
contrast, higher cognitive-ability levels might have allowed older par­
ticipants to refrain from using heuristic strategies that work well in
naturalistic settings (e.g., based on word order) – for example, because
they might have noticed that the frequency with which noncanonical
sentences appeared in our stimulus set (50%) was far higher compared
to their probability in spoken German (Zubin, 1979). If so, high-ability
older participants might have been able to adjust their own interpreta­
tion preferences (or expectations, or “priors”) towards a noncanonical
patient-first interpretation, leading to the observed increases in perfor­
mance when responding to noncanonical sentences and decreases when
responding to canonical sentences. Some support for these speculations
comes from Stine-Morrow (2007), who argued that older adults may
exploit their explicit knowledge strategically to support comprehension
in the face of specific age-related declines (e.g., the large SO/OS dif­
ferences which were particularly evident in older versus younger in­
dividuals with lower cognitive-ability levels), thus suggesting that agerelated shifts in heuristic strategies for comprehension might be selfregulated and based on considerations of effort and attention alloca­
tion. However, more research is needed to pinpoint the source of this
11

C.I. Zona and J. Reifegerste

Journal of Memory and Language 140 (2025) 104576

unexpected pattern.

R.

We are thankful to the reviewers and editors for their valuable
feedback on this and previous versions of our manuscript.

Limitations and future directions
This study presents a few limitations. For one, collecting data
remotely is likely to have triggered a sampling bias, as the older par­
ticipants who signed up for and were able to complete a web-based study
were likely quite familiar with computer technology. Perhaps because of
this, our sample was relatively young, limiting the generalizability of
our conclusions. In addition, the technological equipment of our par­
ticipants may have varied systematically as a function of age, as older
participants are likely to possess older and less powerful hardware than
younger university students.
Furthermore, the use of efficiency scores for our analysis limits our
investigations to imbalances in the number of trials available for the
analysis, which exhibited systematic variability as a function of condi­
tion and age.
Moreover, as with most studies on cognitive aging, our crosssectional sample may be subject to cohort effects and similar betweensubject differences that were not assessed and thus not controlled for.
Future work should address this shortcoming – for example by
combining cross-sectional and longitudinal sampling – to advance our
understanding of how individual levels of cognitive abilities modulate
lifespan changes in comprehension and recall.
Lastly, while the present study pointed to important roles for
cognitive abilities in the use of visual information during sentence
comprehension, future studies might complement the behavioral ap­
proaches used here with brain-imaging techniques (e.g., (f)MRI). As laid
out in the Introduction, it has been suggested that (age-related) shifts in
heuristic-strategy use might be tied to declines in the connectivity of the
frontoparietal control network (Spreng et al., 2010; Campbell et al.
2012). If this is the case, we might, for example, expect similar corre­
lations between the amount of benefit conferred by visual information
and measures of neural connectivity (e.g., fractional anisotropy, mean
diffusivity) as we found for measures of cognitive capacity (i.e., cogni­
tive scores) in the present study, further elucidating the (neuro-)cogni­
tive mechanisms involved in sentence comprehension.

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jml.2024.104576.
References
