predictors of ability across many cognitive domains. In particular,
multiple WMAC measures have been shown to be predictive of source
memory performance, paired associated recall and delayed free recall
performance (Unsworth et al., 2014). One follow-up study replicated the
findings that multiple working memory task measures collectively pre­
dicted variance in delayed free recall performance (Miller et al., 2019).
Moreover, pupil dilation during encoding, a measure of attention con­
trol, explained significant variance in delayed free recall performance,
suggesting that successful recall of verbal materials relies on attentional
control resources (Van der Wel & Van Steenbergen, 2018). These studies

collectively suggest that attentional control differences have been shown
to impact performance across a wide range of long-term memory tasks.
The studies above measured long-term memory abilities using either
recall of verbal materials (Miller et al., 2019), or source memory of vi­
sual images (Unsworth et al., 2014). One common feature between these
two paradigms is that the memory tests appear to be highly attention
demanding, such that they exhibit higher costs under divided attention
conditions as compared to recognition memory for single items. For
instance, in a signature study, Craik et al. (1996) showed that when
participants were asked to perform a secondary task while studying
verbal materials, both recall and recognition memory were slower and
less accurate compared to when participants were fully concentrating on
the memory task alone. However, free recall performance showed more
than twice as much accuracy cost (46 %) compared to recognition
memory (22 %) when the divided attention task was administered
during encoding. Furthermore, the response time cost was nearly five
times larger for free recall (146 %) than recognition task (32 %) when
the divided attention task was performed during retrieval. Therefore,
free recall tasks appear to require more attentional control resources
than recognition memory tasks during both encoding and retrieval.

This article is part of a special issue entitled: ‘Individual differences in memory’ published in Journal of Memory and Language.
* Corresponding author at: Institute for Mind and Biology, University of Chicago, 940 East 57th St., Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
E-mail address: chongzhao@uchicago.edu (C. Zhao).

☆

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2025.104665
Received 31 March 2024; Received in revised form 24 May 2025; Accepted 7 June 2025
Available online 16 June 2025
0749-596X/© 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

Similarly, Troyer et al. (1999) showed that source memory, particularly
spatial location retrieval, showed a higher memory cost with divided
attention than item memory. They concluded that source processing
required more attentional control resources than forming item memory.
The divided attention literature raises the possibility that the robust
correlations between attentional control and long-term memory may be
specific to source memory and recall tasks, due to the higher level of
attentional control these paradigms require. Therefore, simple recogni­
tion memory performance for items, because of its reduced reliance on
attention compared to either recall or source retrieval, may not be
predicted by attentional control differences. Echoing this view, indi­
vidual differences studies of item memory, source memory and recall
had been shown to be better explained by a dual-factor or three-factor
model than a single long-term memory factor model (Unsworth, 2019;
Unsworth & Brewer, 2009). In their analyses, the recollection factor,
shared by item recognition, source memory and recall, was explained by
the working memory factor. By contrast, the familiarity factor, on which
only item recognition loaded, did not predict the working memory factor
formed with span tasks. This evidence converges with the dividedattention literature in suggesting that recognition memory for items
has fewer demands for attentional or working memory resources than
more effortful retrieval tasks, such as free recall or source memory tasks.
A compelling alternative hypothesis is that recognition memory,
despite being less effortful to perform at a high level, still requires
substantial attentional control resources for successful performance.
Supporting this view, more recent literature using divided attention
paradigms has suggested that performing a secondary task during
encoding induces similar costs for both item and source memory. In a
series of experiments, Naveh-Benjamin et al. (2003) showed that the
detrimental effects of divided attention were equal for item memory and
source memory between the item and its source information, such as
fonts, a paired word, or a paired non-word. Moreover, they tested the
participants with free recall, cued recall, and recognition memory under
divided attention conditions, and found that performance under divided
attention condition was equally hurt with all three test conditions. The
findings suggest that the encoding of item memory may rely on similar
resources to those during the encoding of source information in memory.
A parallel line of research on individual differences discovered that span
task performance loaded positively on both recognition and recall fac­
tors, suggesting that attentional control might be involved in both
recognition and recall (Unsworth, 2010). One potential caveat to the
study, however, is that the authors included the source recognition task
into the recognition factor, on which item recognition memory also
loaded. As a result, the structural equation model in the paper did not
separate the contribution of attentional resources to source memory
from those to item recognition memory, leaving the question open for
future studies.
Our review above was based on divided attention and attentional
control side of the question. Although it’s currently debatable on
whether attentional control and working memory reflect the same
construct, our primary goal here is to test whether working memory
capacity predicts simple recognition memory. For instance, prior
research has suggested that individual differences in working memory
capacity stem from variations across multiple cognitive processes,
including primary memory capacity, attentional control, and secondary
memory abilities (Unsworth, 2016). More recent studies have further
indicated that both attentional control and secondary memory pro­
cesses, such as recognition and source memory, mediate the relationship
between working memory capacity and higher-order cognitive func­
tions, including reading comprehension and fluid intelligence (Robison
et al., 2024). While these studies have examined how different facets of
working memory support complex cognitive tasks, our focus in the
current study is on whether working memory capacity also plays a role
in simple recognition memory tasks, and if so, what factors may affect
the correlation between working memory capacity and recognition
memory performance. On one hand, working memory and recognition

memory differ substantially in terms of capacity and activation levels.
That is, because recognition memory is often supported by long-term
memory, a correlation with working memory might not necessarily be
expected. On the other hand, because working memory and recognition
memory may share similar decision-making processes under uncer­
tainty, it’s possible that this shared component leads to a measurable
correlation between working memory capacity and simple recognition
memory performance.
The work reviewed above raises an important secondary question
about whether individual differences in recognition and source memory
form a coherent long-term memory factor. Prior studies have suggested
that item recognition memory and source memory rely on distinct
neural signatures. For example, when participants were instructed to
encode the source of a visual item, the event-related potential (ERP) old/
new effect during the test phase was observed to be larger and earlier
compared to when they were instructed to memorize the item itself
without source information (Guo et al., 2006). Additionally, item
memory elicited an earlier onset of visual ERP than source memory,
indicating that source memory retrieval required more extensive
conscious processing (Thakral & Slotnick, 2015). However, other evi­
dence supports a more unified view, such that recognition and source
memory depend upon on similar neural processes used by long-term
memory. For instance, a neuroimaging study suggested that item and
source memory rely on the medial temporal lobe to a similar degree
(Gold et al., 2006). Furthermore, they found that hippocampal lesion
participants were similarly impaired on item and source memory tasks.
Together, the question of whether item and source memory task rely on
different levels of attentional resources, or instead form a single
coherent long-term memory factor, remains unresolved.
In our current study, we directly tested whether working memory
differences predict recognition memory performance. In each of our
Studies, subjects completed a visual working memory task, a source
memory task, and a recognition memory task within a single session. In
Study 1, we tested whether working memory abilities, measured with a
change detection paradigm with visual arrays (Luck & Vogel, 1997),
predicted simple item recognition memory differences for real-world
objects (Brady et al., 2008). In Study 2, we examined whether work­
ing memory differences continued to predict item recognition memory
performance when items were presented during study at rapid rates (2
items per second) that are known to tax the temporal limits of atten­
tional and working memory encoding (Potter, 1976). In Study 3, we
tested whether the lack of correlation between working memory and
rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) recognition performance was
due to the brief exposure duration of each image rather than the rapid
rate of incoming images during the study phase. Lastly, to generalize our
findings to the working memory and attentional control (WMAC) psy­
chological factor, we administered a wide range of newly developed
attentional control tasks to measure the construct in Study 4 (Burgoyne
et al., 2023; Martin et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022), along with a visual
working memory capacity measure. This design also allowed us to test a
secondary hypothesis within each of our experiments regarding whether
source memory and recognition memory were highly correlated with
each other, despite the differences in retrieval demands.
Study 1
Humans have an exceptional ability to recognize visual objects. For
example, after only a single brief presentation, we can accurately (~90
%) recognize thousands of visual scenes and individually presented
objects (Standing, 1973; Brady et al., 2008). This exceptional level of
recognition memory ability stands in sharp contrast with other measures
of long-term memory, such as free recall or source memory judgments in
which accurate mnemonic performance is much more effortful and
limited even for much smaller sets of stimuli. One potential explanation
for the difference is that tasks such as free recall and source memory may
depend more on attention-demanding processes at encoding and
2

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

retrieval, as compared to less effortful recognition judgements which
may rely more heavily on a general sense of familiarity. In line with this
proposal, previous research has demonstrated that individual differ­
ences in WMAC measures predict source memory performance
(Unsworth et al., 2014). However, whether the easier, familiarity-driven
visual recognition process also demands WMAC resources remains un­
resolved. To test on this question, in Study 1, we measured working
memory, recognition memory and source memory abilities of partici­
pants. We aimed to test if 1) individual differences in working memory
predicted recognition memory, 2) individual differences in familiaritydriven recognition memory predicted recollection-driven source mem­
ory, and 3) individual differences in working memory uniquely pre­
dicted familiarity-driven recognition memory even after the
contribution of source memory was regressed out.

%).
Materials and procedure
For Study 1, all participants signed an informed consent, and
completed three tasks. Each participant started with an attentional
control task (Fig. 1A), followed by a visuo-spatial source memory task
(Fig. 1B) and a visual recognition memory task (Fig. 1C).
Working memory Task: Change detection paradigm
During each trial, six colored squares were displayed on the screen
simultaneously for 250 ms. This was followed by a blank retention in­
terval lasting 1,000 ms. Subsequently, a single-colored square appeared,
and participants were required to determine whether the color of this
square had changed compared to the one presented earlier in that po­
sition. Changes happened with a probability of 0.5. Participants
completed a total of 140 trials for the change detection task. The
dependent variable of interest was the K capacity measure (N x (hit-false
alarm)) of the working memory task.

Method
Participants
For Study 1, 385 young residents of the United States (18–35 years
old) were recruited through Prolific and received monetary compensa­
tion ($10.00/hour). All participants reported normal or corrected-tonormal vision, no color blindness, fluency in English, no history of
mental illness/condition, and no cognitive impairment. All participants
had successfully completed 90 % or more of the studies that they had
participated in previously on Prolific (filtered by approval rate >= 90

Source memory Task: Visuo-spatial source memory
In the study phase, we presented 30 images of real-world objects. The
average picture size was approximately 4.6◦ by 4.6◦ of visual angle,
assuming the subject was seated 80 cm from the screen. Each image was
centered on the screen during both the study and test phases.
During the study phase, each trial started with a 500-ms fixation

Fig. 1. Experimental Procedures for Study 1. (A) Attentional Control task: simultaneous change detection paradigm. Six colored squares appeared on the screen
simultaneously. At the end of the trial, participants were cued with a square at one of the six original locations, with 50% exhibited a color change and 50%. without
change. (B) Source Memory task. During each trial of the study phase, a real-world object appeared at one of the four quadrants on the screen for 2 s. The participants
need to encode the content of the picture as well as where it was placed on the screen. We had thirty pictures in total for the study phase. During each trial of the test
phase, we cued the participants with the studied object at the center of the screen, and they were asked to recall which quadrant the object was in during the study
phase. (C) A sample of the recognition memory paradigm used in Study 1. During each trial of the study phase, a real-world object appeared at the center of the
screen for 3 s. The participants need to encode the content of the picture. During each trial of the test phase, participants were shown two real-world images on the
screen, one on the left and the other on the right. They were asked to recognize which of the image was studied. In each trial, one image was always a studied picture,
and the other image was a new image that the participants had never studied in the experiment.
3

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

cross. Following that, a picture was displayed in one of the four quad­
rants of the screen for 2000 ms. The participants were instructed to
memorize the visual appearance as well as the spatial location of the
image. In the test phase, we presented each participant with the same 30
pictures one at a time, and the participants were asked to press W/E/S/D
to indicate which quadrant the image was originally at (W for upper left,
E for upper right, S for lower left and D for lower right). Each trial in the
test phase began with a 500-ms fixation cross, followed by the presen­
tation of the test picture at the center of the screen until the participant
made a button press to record their source memory response. The stimuli
were drawn from a previously published set of real-world objects (Brady
et al., 2008). Both parts of the experiment were programmed using the
jsPsych package (De Leeuw, 2015). The dependent variable of interest
was the accuracy of the source memory task.

cross. Following that, a picture was displayed at the center of the screen
for 3000 ms. In the test phase, we presented each participant with 100
pairs of pictures, two at a time, one on the left side of the screen and the
other one on the right side of the screen. Among the two images on
screen, one image had already been shown in the study phase and the
other one was novel to the participant. The participants were asked to
perform a two-alternative forced choice task to report which image was
the one they had seen during the study phase. Each trial in the test phase
began with a 250-ms fixation cross, followed by the presentation of the
test picture at the center of the screen until the participant made a
button press to record their old versus new response, along with their
confidence level.
Participants used the number keys on a keyboard to indicate their
confidence and which image was the one they studied earlier. Specif­
ically, the number keys 1 and 2 indicated that the item on the left side of
the screen was the studied one, with high and low confidence levels,
respectively. On the other hand, the number keys 9 and 8 indicated that
the item on the right side of the screen was the studied one, with high
and low confidence levels, respectively. The stimuli were drawn from a
previously published set of real-world objects (Brady et al., 2008). Both
parts of the experiment were programmed using the jsPsych package (De

Recognition memory task
In the study phase, we presented 100 images of real-world objects.
The average picture size was approximately 4.6◦ by 4.6◦ of visual angle,
assuming the subject was seated 80 cm from the screen. Each image was
centered on the screen during both the study and test phases (Fig. 2A).
During the study phase, each trial started with a 250-ms fixation

Fig. 2. Results of Study 1. (A) Schema of Recognition Memory Task in Study 1: the images were presented on screen for 3250 ms, and 250 ms of inter-stimulus
interval. (B) Working memory differences significantly predicted source memory performances (r(383) = 0.30, p < 0.001). (C) Source memory performances
significantly predicted recognition memory accuracies (r(383) = 0.49, p < 0.001). (D) Working memory differences significantly predicted recognition memory
accuracies (r(383) = 0.33, p < 0.001). (E) A sample Venn diagram on variance explained by working memory, source memory and recognition memory.
4

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

Leeuw, 2015). The dependent variable of interest was the accuracy of
the recognition memory task.

Table 2
Correlations among all measures in Study 1 (** indicates p < .01 level).

Sample size estimation and exclusion criterion
In Study 1, a stopping criterion was established when the Bayes
Factor (BF) exceeded 3, indicating support for the alternative hypothesis
(i.e., working memory predicted simple recognition memory), or fell
below 0.33, indicating support for the null hypothesis (i.e., working
memory did not predict simple recognition memory). Here, without
prior data on the correlation strength between working memory and
recognition memory measures, we estimated the required sample size
based on a correlation of r = 0.15 and a beta of 0.2 to capture mean­
ingful correlations between the two variables. This estimation indicated
a need for 347 subjects. A multivariate exclusion criterion was applied to
the behavioral data, excluding participants whose task performance fell
below chance and more than 2.5 standard deviations below the mean.

SD

Skewness

Kurtosis

Reliability

2.46
0.81
0.74

1.15
0.13
0.14

0.17
− 0.51
− 0.56

− 0.51
− 0.64
− 0.14

0.84
0.92
0.89

Working Memory
Recognition Memory
Source Memory

−
0.33**
0.30**

−
−
0.49**

Contrary to our predictions, in Study 1 we found that individual
differences in working memory capacity predicted performance in a
relatively easy visual recognition memory task; a relationship that was
comparable to what we observed for the more effortful source memory
task. One possibility for the correlation between recognition memory
and working memory capacity is that the relatively slow encoding rate
(3 s) during study provided sufficient time to rely on attentional and
working memory mechanisms to bolster performance. Prior work using
rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) during the study phase of visual
recognition tasks has shown that these rapid rates produce overall lower
recognition performance in part because they exceed the temporal limits
of an attention-demanding short-term consolidation process (e.g.,
Potter, 1975). However, despite the reduced recognition rate, the RSVP
items appear to still receive relatively deep amounts of perceptual and
semantic processing, reflected by the intact accuracy in picture and
name search tasks (Potter, 1976). Considering the depth of perceptual
and semantic processing, these rapidly presented items may still leave a
detectable mnemonic trace. Furthermore, rapid streams of items are
known to exceed the limits of working memory encoding. Participants
are often unable to encode the second target into memory if it is pre­
sented too close in time following the first target (i.e., attentional blink,
Shapiro et al., 1997). Similarly participants often miss the repetition of
targets in rapid presentation streams (i.e., repetition blindness, Kanw­
isher & Potter, 1990). In Study 2, we directly tested whether WM dif­
ferences will continue to predict recognition memory for rapid streams
of images. That is, do attention control and working memory still play a
role in recognition performance for items that were presented at rates
that exceed the temporal limits of attention and working memory
encoding?
Method
Participants
For Study 2, 199 young residents of the United States (18–35 years
old) were recruited through Prolific and received monetary compensa­
tion ($10.00/hour). All participants reported normal or corrected-tonormal vision, no color blindness, fluency in English, no history of
mental illness/condition, and no cognitive impairment. All participants
had successfully completed 90 % or more of the studies that they had
participated in previously on Prolific (filtered by approval rate >= 90
%).

Table 1
Descriptive statistics and reliability estimates for all measures in Study 1.
Mean

Recognition Memory

Study 2

Table 1 lists descriptive statistics and split half reliability for working
memory, recognition memory and source memory tasks used in Study 1.
Table 2 lists correlations between working memory, recognition mem­
ory and source memory tasks.
In Study 1, we first tested whether individual differences in working
memory predicted source memory accuracy. We found out that working
memory differences positively correlated to source memory perfor­
mance differences (r(383) = 0.30, p < 0.001, Fig. 2B), as shown in
previous studies (Unsworth et al., 2014). More importantly, we tested
whether working memory also predicted visual recognition memory, a
paradigm that was presumably relying less on visual attentional re­
sources than source memory. If the hypothesis held, then we would
expect a weaker or nonsignificant correlation than that with source
memory. Surprisingly, our correlation analysis revealed that working
memory positively predicted recognition memory accuracies (r(383) =
0.33, p < 0.001, Fig. 2D), and the correlation strength was not signifi­
cantly different from the correlation between working memory and
source memory (z(383) = 0.62, p = 0.27). A further correlational
analysis revealed that recognition and source memory strongly corre­
lated with each other (r(383) = 0.49, p < 0.001, Fig. 2C), suggesting the
existence of a more generalized visual long-term memory construct.
These results suggest that both source and item recognition versions of
visual long-term memory tasks rely on working memory resources.
To better quantify the level of working memory resources involved in
each visual long-term memory task, we performed a three-way partial
regression analysis to determine the pairwise shared variance among
working memory, source memory, and recognition memory tasks.
Echoing our correlational results, we first found that working memory
differences continued to share variance with source memory perfor­
mance after recognition memory was regressed out (r(383) = 0.16, p <
0.001, BF = 15.68, Fig. 2E). Likewise, working memory differences also
continued to explain a significant amount of variance with recognition
memory even after source memory performance was regressed out (r
(383) = 0.22, p < 0.001, BF > 1000, Fig. 2E). Additionally, recognition
memory and source memory continued to share significant portions of
variance even after working memory was regressed out (r(383) = 0.44,
p < 0.001, BF > 1000, Fig. 2E). Collectively, our findings suggest that
simple visual recognition memory tasks appear to rely on working

Working Memory
Recognition Memory
Source Memory

Working Memory

memory resources just as much as source memory tasks. Moreover, vi­
sual recognition memory and source memory differences remained
highly correlated with or without attention control differences in the
regression model, suggesting that both may form a coherent visual longterm memory factor in explaining individual differences in human
cognition.

Results

Measure

Correlation

Materials and procedure
For Study 2, all participants provided informed consent, and
completed three tasks. Each participant started with a working memory
task, followed by a visuo-spatial source memory task and a visual
recognition memory task, as in Study 1.
5

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

size based on a correlation of r = 0.3 and a beta of 0.2 to capture
meaningful correlations between the two variables. This estimation
indicated a need for 85 subjects. A multivariate exclusion criterion was
applied to the behavioral data, excluding participants whose task per­
formance fell below chance and more than 2.5 standard deviations
below the mean.

Working memory Task: Change detection paradigm
The working memory task was the same as in Study 1.
Source memory Task: Visuo-spatial source memory
The source memory task was the same as in Study 1.
Recognition memory Task: Rapid presentation
The recognition memory task used the same materials and study-test
procedures as in Study 1. Different from Study 1, during the study phase,
each trial started with a 250-ms fixation cross. Following that, a picture
was displayed at the center of the screen for 250 ms. Therefore, each
participant was presented images at a 250-ms on and 250-ms off pace
(see Fig. 3A). Note that this presentation rate is more than six times
faster than the rate used in Study 1.

Results
Table 3 lists descriptive statistics and split half reliability for working
memory, recognition memory and source memory tasks used in Study 2.
Table 4 lists correlations between working memory, recognition
Table 3
Descriptive statistics and reliability estimates for all measures in Study 2.

Sample size estimation and exclusion criterion
In Study 2, a stopping criterion was established for when the Bayes
Factor (BF) exceeded 3, indicating support for the alternative hypothe­
sis, or fell below 0.33, indicating support for the null hypothesis. Here,
with our observations from Study 1, we estimated the required sample

Measure

Mean

SD

Skewness

Kurtosis

Reliability

Working Memory
Recognition Memory
Source Memory

2.57
0.69
0.73

1.23
0.12
0.15

0.14
− 0.11
− 0.73

− 0.38
− 0.31
0.17

0.73
0.85
0.91

Fig. 3. Results of Study 2. (A) Schema of Recognition Memory Task in Study 2: the images were presented on screen for 250 ms, and 250 ms of inter-stimulus interval,
at a presentation rate six times faster than used in Study 1. (B) Working memory differences significantly predicted source memory performances (r(197) = 0.28, p <
0.001). (C) Source memory performances significantly predicted recognition memory accuracies at a fast presentation rate (r(197) = 0.39, p < 0.001). (D) Working
memory differences did not predict recognition memory accuracies at a fast presentation rate (r(197) = 0.14, p = 0.057). (E) A sample Venn diagram on variance
explained by working memory, source memory and recognition memory.
6

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

presented at study because these two factors were confounded. Here, we
tested whether working memory differences predicted recognition
memory for items with brief (250 ms) exposure durations but with a
slow presentation rate between items by increasing the inter-stimulus
interval to 3000 ms. If the null correlation between working memory
and RSVP recognition was due to the rapid rate of item presentation,
rather than the brief exposure duration, we would expect that the cor­
relation will reemerge for briefly presented items that were presented at
a rate that is slow enough between items to allow for full attention and
working memory processing for each item.

Table 4
Correlations among all measures in Study 2 (** indicates p < .01 level).
Correlation

Working Memory

Recognition Memory

Working Memory
Recognition Memory
Source Memory

−
0.14
0.28**

−
−
0.39**

memory and source memory tasks.
In Study 2, we first tested whether individual differences in working
memory predicted source memory accuracy. We replicated our findings
in Study 1 that working memory differences positively correlated to
source memory performance differences (r(197) = 0.28, p < 0.001,
Fig. 3B). Furthermore, we tested whether working memory predicted
visual recognition memory when the images were presented rapidly. If
the ability to encode a rapid stream of images similarly relies on working
memory resources, then we would expect a strong positive correlation
between working memory and recognition memory with fast presenta­
tion rates. However, in contrast with Study 1 when images were pre­
sented slowly (> 3000 ms per image), our correlation analysis revealed
that working memory did not predict recognition memory accuracies
with rapid presentation (r(197) = 0.14, p = 0.057, Fig. 3D). Moreover,
we found that this nonsignificant correlation with working memory was
significantly weaker than the correlation between working memory and
source memory (z(197) = 1.83, p = 0.03). One possibility for the lack of
correlation is that recognition memory with RSVP presentation no
longer relies on the common visual long-term memory factor we
observed in Study 1. If this is the case, we would expect RSVP recog­
nition to no longer predict source memory performance. However,
instead we found that rapid recognition and source memory were still
strongly correlated with each other (r(197) = 0.39, p < 0.001, Fig. 3C).
The robust correlation between RSVP recognition memory and the
slowly-presented source memory task indicates that both forms of
memory continue to form a general visual long-term memory factor,
suggesting that RSVP recognition performance still utilizes the same
common long term memory mechanisms as we observed in Study 1.
Instead, the null correlation between working memory and RSVP
recognition performance suggests that the reduced attentional and
working memory processing for these rapidly presented items is what
disconnected recognition performance from working memory capacity.
To better quantify the level of working memory resources involved in
each visual long-term memory task, we performed a three-way partial
regression analysis to determine the pairwise shared variances among
working memory, source memory, and RSVP recognition tasks. Similar
to our correlational findings, we first replicated our findings that
working memory differences shared variance with source memory per­
formance when recognition memory was regressed out (r(197) = 0.25, p
< 0.001, BF = 59.44, Fig. 3E). Different from Study 1, working memory
differences stop explaining shared variances with recognition memory
when images were presented rapidly (r(197) = 0.03, p = 0.69, BF =
0.096, Fig. 3E). However, RSVP recognition memory and source mem­
ory shared significant portions of variance after working memory was
regressed out (r(197) = 0.37, p < 0.001, BF > 1000, Fig. 3E). Collec­
tively, our findings reveal that visual recognition memory tasks do not
rely on working memory resources if images were presented rapidly
during study. Moreover, despite the severe difference between presen­
tation rates at encoding, recognition memory and source memory indi­
vidual differences remained highly correlated, suggesting that both
tasks form a coherent visual long-term memory factor.

Method
Participants
For Study 3, 112 young residents of the United States (18–35 years
old) were recruited through Prolific and received monetary compensa­
tion ($10.00/hour). All participants reported normal or corrected-tonormal vision, no color blindness, fluency in English, no history of
mental illness/condition, and no cognitive impairment. All participants
had successfully completed 90 % or more of the studies that they had
participated in previously on Prolific (filtered by approval rate >= 90
%).
Materials and procedure
For Study 3, all participants provided informed consent, and
completed three tasks. Each participant started with a working memory
task, followed by a visuo-spatial source memory task and a visual
recognition memory task, as in Exp 1.
Working memory Task: Change detection paradigm. The working memory
task was the same as in Study 1.
Source memory Task: Visuo-spatial source memory. The source memory
task was the same as in Study 1.
Recognition memory Task: Long inter-stimulus interval. The recognition
memory task used the same materials and study-test procedures as in
Exp 1. Unlike Study 1, each study item was displayed at the center of the
screen for 250 ms. Following that, a 3250-ms fixation cross was dis­
played during the blank inter-stimulus interval. Therefore, each partic­
ipant saw the images at a 250-ms on and 3250-ms off pace (Fig. 4A),
such that the exposure duration was the same as Study 2, but the pre­
sentation rate was the same as used in Study 1.
Sample size estimation and exclusion criterion
In Study 3, a stopping criterion was established when the Bayes
Factor (BF) exceeded 3, indicating support for the alternative hypothe­
sis, or fell below 0.33, indicating support for the null hypothesis. Here,
with our observations from Study 1, we estimated the required sample
size based on a correlation of r = 0.3 and a beta of 0.2 to capture
meaningful correlations between the two variables. This estimation
indicated a need for 85 subjects. A multivariate exclusion criterion was
applied to the behavioral data, excluding participants whose task per­
formance fell below chance and more than 2.5 standard deviations
below the mean.
Results

Study 3

Table 5 lists descriptive statistics and split half reliability for working
memory, recognition memory and source memory tasks used in Study 3.
Table 6 lists correlations between working memory, recognition mem­
ory and source memory tasks.
In Study 3, we first tested whether individual differences in working
memory predicted source memory accuracy. We replicated the findings

In Study 2, we found that working memory differences did not pre­
dict RSVP recognition memory performance. However, it is unclear
whether the lack of correlation was due to the rapid rate of item pre­
sentation (2 per second) or brief stimulus exposure (250 ms) of each item
7

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Fig. 4. Results of Study 3. (A) Schema of Recognition Memory Task in Study 3: the images were presented on screen for 250 ms, and 3250 ms of inter-stimulus
interval. (B) Attentional control differences significantly predicted source memory performances (r(110) = 0.42, p < 0.001). (C) Source memory performances
significantly predicted recognition memory accuracies (r(110) = 0.49, p < 0.001). (D) Attentional control differences significantly predicted recognition memory
accuracies (r(110) = 0.43, p < 0.001). (E) A sample Venn diagram on variance explained by attentional control, source memory and recognition memory.

working memory processing. Similar to Study 1, we found that that
working memory significantly predicted recognition memory accuracy
with brief exposure durations (r(110) = 0.43, p < 0.001, Fig. 4D), and
this correlation strength was no different from the correlation we
observed between working memory and source memory (z(110) = 0.12,
p = 0.45). Our findings suggest that the lack of correlation between
working memory abilities and RSVP recognition in Study 2 was not due
to the brief exposure duration of the images themselves but was instead
due to the high number of images presented per second. Thus, when
items are presented at a rate that is sufficient for attention and working
memory processing, the recognition of even briefly presented items
(250 ms) is well predicted by working memory ability. Moreover, we
performed a correlational analysis between recognition memory with
brief presentations and source memory. Similar to Study 1 and 2, we
found that recognition and source memory remained strongly correlated
with each other (r(110) = 0.49, p < 0.001, Fig. 4C). The robust corre­
lation between recognition memory and source memory are consistent
with our hypothesis that both forms of memory collectively form a
generalized long-term memory construct.
To better quantify the level of working memory resources involved in
each visual long-term memory task, we performed a three-way partial

Table 5
Descriptive statistics and reliability estimates for all measures in Experiment 3.
Measure

Mean

SD

Skewness

Kurtosis

Reliability

Working Memory
Recognition Memory
Source Memory

2.06
0.71
0.70

1.29
0.14
0.15

− 0.01
− 0.21
− 0.49

− 0.56
− 1.00
− 0.31

0.76
0.93
0.89

Table 6
Correlations among all measures in Experiment 3 (** indicates p < .01 level).
Correlation

Working Memory

Recognition Memory

Working Memory
Recognition Memory
Source Memory

−
0.43**
0.42**

−
−
0.49**

from Experiment 1 and 2 that working memory differences positively
correlated to source memory performance differences (r(110) = 0.42, p
< 0.001, Fig. 4B). Furthermore, we tested whether working memory
predicted visual recognition memory when the images were presented
briefly, but with a slow presentation rate to allow for attention and
8

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

regression analysis to determine the pairwise shared variances among
working memory, source memory, and brief-exposure recognition
memory tasks. Similar to our correlational findings, we first replicated
our findings that working memory differences shared variance with
source memory performance after recognition memory was regressed
out (r(110) = 0.26, p < 0.001, BF = 6.00, Fig. 4E). Similar to Study 1,
working memory differences explained significant portions of shared
variances with brief-exposure recognition memory (r(110) = 0.38, p <
0.001, BF = 514.05, Fig. 4E). Moreover, recognition memory and source
memory shared significant portions of variance after working memory
was regressed out (r(110) = 0.28, p < 0.001, BF = 9.87, Fig. 4E).
Collectively, our findings demonstrate that visual recognition memory
tasks rely upon working memory resources if sufficient time is provided
for attention and working memory processing. Additionally, recognition
memory and source memory differences remained highly correlated
after working memory contributions are removed, suggesting that both
tasks may form a coherent visual long-term memory factor.

task (Zhao, Vogel & Awh, 2023).

Study 4

Flanker Square
The Flanker Square task is a modified Flanker task (Burgoyne et al.,
2023). In each trial of the Flanker Square task, participants were pre­
sented with a target stimulus alongside two possible responses. Both the
target stimulus and response options consisted of sets of five arrows
arranged horizontally (i.e., ≪>≪). Participants were instructed to
choose the response option where the middle arrow aligned in direction
with the outer arrows in the target stimulus. For instance, if the target
stimulus displayed arrows pointing left and right (i.e., ≪>≪), partici­
pants would select the response option with a central arrow pointing left
(i.e., ≫<≫). Therefore, the task required participants to focus on the
outer arrows of the target stimulus and the central arrow of the response
options while disregarding the central arrow of the target stimulus and
the outer arrows of the response options. Each participant completed 30
s of practice, and 90 s of test phase. The Flanker Square score was
calculated as the difference between number of correct and incorrect
responses.

Filtering Change Localization
The Filtering Change Localization task was modified from the
Filtering Change Detection task (Luck & Vogel, 1997; Martin et al.,
2021). On the start of each trial, a word, either RED or BLUE, denoting
the color of the items to be remembered (the selection instruction), was
presented for 200 ms, followed by a 100-ms interval. Subsequently, 10
bars were displayed for 250 ms, with half of them being drawn in red
and the other half in blue, which is effectively a set size 5 condition.
After a 900-ms delay, only the bars corresponding to the attended color
reappeared. During test phase, only one of the bars changed its orien­
tation compared to the encoding phase. The participants were asked to
determine which one of the five bars had changed its orientation
compared to the initial presentation. This Filtering Localization phase
had 60 trials in total. The Filtering Localization measure was the accu­
racy of the localization task.

In Studies 1–3, we found that working memory capacity was pre­
dictive of recognition memory so long as the presentation rate of items
during study did not exceed attention and working memory limits.
However, it is unclear whether broader measures of attentional control
abilities (e.g., Kane & Engle, 2002) would also show a similar rela­
tionship with visual long-term memory performance. In Study 4, we
administered a battery of four WMAC tasks and tested whether they
revealed a relationship with recognition and source memory that was
comparable to what we have observed with measures of working
memory capacity.
Method
Participants
For Study 4, 145 young residents of the United States (18–35 years
old) were recruited through Prolific and received monetary compensa­
tion ($10.00/hour). All participants reported normal or corrected-tonormal vision, no color blindness, fluency in English, no history of
mental illness/condition, and no cognitive impairment. All participants
had successfully completed 90 % or more of the studies that they had
participated in previously on Prolific (filtered by approval rate >= 90
%).

Simon Square
The Simon Square task was a modified Simon task (Burgoyne et al.,
2023). In each trial of the Simon Square task, participants were pre­
sented with a target stimulus and two response options. The target
stimulus was represented by an arrow, and the response options were
the words “RIGHT” and “LEFT.” Participants were instructed to choose
the response option that corresponded to the direction indicated by the
arrow in the target stimulus. For instance, if the arrow in the target
stimulus pointed to the left, the participant should select the response
option with the word “LEFT.” Both the target stimulus arrow and the
response options could appear on either side of the computer screen with
equal probability. Consequently, participants had to attend to the di­
rection indicated by the target stimulus arrow while understanding the
meaning of the response options. Simultaneously, they must disregard
the side of the screen where the target stimulus arrow and response
options were presented. Each participant completed 30 s of practice, and
90 s of test phase. The Simon Square score was calculated as the dif­
ference between number of correct and incorrect responses.

Materials and procedure
For Study 4, all participants provided informed consent and
completed six tasks. Each participant started with four attentional
control tasks (change localization paradigm, filtering change localiza­
tion paradigm, Flanker square task and Simon square task, see Fig. 5),
followed by a visuo-spatial source memory task and a visual recognition
memory task, as in Study 1.
Working Memory and Attentional Control (WMAC) Tasks: Change
localization, filtering change localization, Flanker Square, Simon square
Change Localization
The Change Localization task was adopted from the color Change
Localization task used in prior research (Zhao et al., 2022). During every
trial, six colored squares were simultaneously displayed for a duration of
250 ms, followed by a blank retention interval lasting 1,000 ms. Sub­
sequently, the same six squares reappeared in their original positions,
but with one of the colors was changed to a hue not previously shown in
that trial. Each square was assigned a digit ranging from 1 to 6, and
participants were required to press the corresponding key to identify the
square that changed color. The spatial arrangement of the six numbers
was randomized across trials. The Change Localization measure was the
capacity of the working memory, calculated from the accuracy of the

Source Memory Task: Visuo-spatial source memory. The source memory
task was the same as in Study 1.
Recognition Memory Task: long inter-stimulus interval. The recognition
memory task was the same as in Study 1.
Sample size estimation and exclusion criterion
In Study 4, a stopping criterion was established when the Bayes
Factor (BF) exceeded 3, indicating support for the alternative
9

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

Fig. 5. Experimental Procedures for Study 4. (A) Schema of Change Localization Task. (B) Schema of the Filtering Change Localization Task. (C) Schema of the Flanker
Square Task. (D) Schema of the Simon Square Task.

10

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

hypothesis, or fell below 0.33, indicating support for the null hypothesis.
Here, with our observations from Study 1, we estimated the required
sample size based on a correlation of r = 0.3 and a beta of 0.2 to capture
meaningful correlations between the two variables. This estimation
indicated a need for 85 subjects. A multivariate exclusion criterion was
applied to the behavioral data, excluding participants whose task per­
formance fell below chance and more than 2.5 standard deviations
below the mean.

Table 8
Correlations among all measures in Study 4 (** indicates p < .01 level).

Results

Mean

SD

Skewness

Kurtosis

Reliability

2.43
0.47
31.41
38.34
0.77
0.79

1.00
0.15
13.93
13.21
0.15
0.14

− 0.11
0.30
− 0.36
− 0.39
− 0.52
− 0.98

− 0.01
− 0.22
− 0.40
0.83
− 0.60
0.53

0.81
0.83
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.93

2

3

4

5

1. Change Localization
2. Filtering Localization
3. Flanker Square
4. Simon Square
5. Recognition Memory
6. Source Memory

−
0.58**
0.40**
0.35**
0.39**
0.45**

−
−
0.40**
0.32**
0.34**
0.37**

−
−
−
0.43**
0.32**
0.36**

−
−
−
−
0.23**
0.31**

−
−
−
−
−
0.60**

General Discussion
In our study, we examined the relationship between individual dif­
ferences in working memory, attentional control, source memory and
recognition memory. First, we replicated previous findings that working
memory and attentional control abilities predict source memory per­
formance. Surprisingly, recognition memory performance, a paradigm
that has been presumed to be less attention demanding than source
memory, was also robustly predicted by working memory and atten­
tional control abilities (Studies 1, 3 and 4). The only exception that we
observed to this relationship was when the study items were presented
rapidly (2 per second), at which point, working memory no longer
predicted recognition memory (Study 2). In addition, we found that
irrespective of differences in presentation rate and exposure duration of
items during study, recognition memory performance remained highly
correlated with source memory performance in all four Studies. An
exploratory factor analysis confirmed our correlational results and
suggests that both tasks load onto a common latent factor (Study 4), and
that each of the WMAC tasks coherently loaded onto a separate latent
factor.
Our study suggests that under most circumstances, an individual’s
overall recognition memory performance has significant contributions
from his or her working memory and attentional control abilities. All
five metrics of working memory and attentional control tasks, change
detection in Studies 1 and 3, change localization, filtering localization,
Flanker square and Simon square in Study 4 significantly predicted
recognition memory performance. A potential challenge to this robust
relationship would be that although certain levels of working memory
and attentional control are necessary for recognition memory, source
memory may require much higher contributions of working memory
and attentional control resources than simple recognition. If this hy­
pothesis was correct, then the remaining shared variance between
WMAC measures and recognition would be expected to be close to zero

Table 7
Descriptive statistics and reliability estimates for all measures in Study 4.
Change Localization
Filtering Localization
Flanker Square
Simon Square
Recognition Memory
Source Memory

1

Square (0.52), Simon Square (0.58), Change Localization (0.67) and
Filtering Localization (0.66) all significantly (> 0.3) loaded onto Factor
1, and Source Memory (0.6) and Recognition Memory (0.86) both
significantly loaded onto Factor 2. The exploratory factor analysis
confirmed that a common WMAC factor underlay our four tasks. More
importantly, the two forms of long-term memory formed a shared visual
long-term memory factor, converging with our findings in Studies 1–3.
Lastly, all six of our tasks loaded positively to both WMAC and long-term
memory factors, suggesting that the predictive power between the two
abilities may stem from the fact that visual long-term memory tasks
generally require attentional control resources. To further validate if
working memory and attentional control abilities would separately
predict long-term memory abilities (Factor 2), we performed another
partial correlational analysis on working memory (change localization
and filtering localization), attentional control (Flanker square and
Simon square), and long-term memory abilities (recognition and source
memory, see Fig. 7C). We confirmed that attentional control and
working memory abilities were closely correlated (r(143) = 0.37, p <
0.001), and both working memory (r(143) = 0.36, p < 0.001) and
attentional control (r(143) = 0.21, p < 0.001) predicted long-term
memory.

Table 7 lists descriptive statistics and split half reliability for working
memory & attentional control, recognition memory and source memory
tasks used in Study 4. Table 8 lists correlations between working
memory & attentional control, recognition memory and source memory
tasks.
We tested whether a broad set of working memory attentional con­
trol (WMAC) measures predict visual long-term memory performance
similar to what we observed with working memory capacity in our
previous experiments. First, we tested if WMAC abilities, measured with
four paradigms, predicted source memory performance and found that
performance in all four tasks was positively corelated to source memory
performance (change localization: r(143) = 0.35, p < 0.001; filtering
change localization: r(143) = 0.26, p = 0.002; Flanker square: r(143) =
0.29, p < 0.001; Simon square: r(143) = 0.26, p = 0.002, see Fig. 6 A-D),
which generalizes our findings from Studies 1–3. Moreover, we also
found that the four WMAC tasks were all predictive of simple recogni­
tion memory accuracies (change localization: r(143) = 0.39, p < 0.001;
filtering change localization: r(143) = 0.34, p < 0.001; Flanker square: r
(143) = 0.32, p < 0.001; Simon square: r(143) = 0.23, p = 0.006, see
Fig. 6 E-H). These results indicate that the relationship we observed
between visual long-term memory performance and working memory
generalizes to other attention control and working memory measures.
Furthermore, when we divide the WMAC measures into working
memory and attentional control measures, visual long-term memory
differences shared unique variance with both the WM and AC factors,
which replicates and extends our findings with WM measures (Fig. 7C).
Therefore, recognition memory appears to rely on similar levels of
WMAC resources compared to source memory, despite prior evidence
suggesting that source memory performance is impaired more severely
under split-attention tasks than recognition memory.
Lastly, we replicated our findings in Study 1 that source memory and
recognition memory were highly correlated (r(143) = 0.60, p < 0.001,
see Fig. 7A). To further examine if these two tasks form a coherent visual
long-term memory factor, we performed an exploratory factor analysis
with our four WMAC tasks and two visual long-term memory tasks. We
first performed a Bartlett Sphericity test and got a significant chi square
of 237.79 (p < 0.001), fulfilling a prerequisite to perform factor analysis.
We then conducted a Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin criterion test with KMO of
0.79, indicating that our observed variables were sufficiently correlated
with each other. To determine the optimal number of factors, we
calculated the eigenvalues for our data. Our first two eigenvalues
returned as 2.96 and 0.92, higher than the third eigenvalue 0.74 and
were both close to or larger than 1.0. Therefore, we performed a twofactor factor analysis on our data (see Fig. 7B). We found that Flanker

Measure

Correlation

11

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

Fig. 6. Results of Study 4. (A-D) Working Memory Attentional Control (WMAC) differences significantly predicted source memory performances (ps < 0.001). (E-H)
Working Memory Attentional Control (WMAC) differences significantly predicted recognition memory performances (ps < 0.001).

once contributions from source memory were regressed out. Contrary to
such prediction, we found that the shared variance between recognition
memory and WMAC measures remained significant even after regressing
source memory performance in Studies 1, 3 and 4. Therefore, simple
item recognition memory appears to require extensive attentional con­
trol resources, and this reliance is partially independent from the
attentional control resources that source memory requires.
The one exception to this robust correlation that we observed was
that when the sequence of 100 images was presented at a rapid pre­
sentation rate during study, working memory abilities no longer pre­
dicted recognition memory performance. Storage of items in working

memory is known to depend upon a somewhat slow, attentiondemanding consolidation process (Potter, 1976; Vogel et al., 2006)
that can take several hundred milliseconds per item (Jolicøeur & Del­
l’Acqua, 1998). Our RSVP presentation rate of 2 items per second likely
exceeded the temporal limits of this consolidation process, which would
explain why RSVP recognition performance no longer depended on
working memory ability. This implies that recognition performance for
rapidly presented items reflects learning that occurred in the absence of
significant contributions from attention and working memory resources.
Our findings may be consistent with prior reports that individual
differences in working memory capacity (as measured by OSPAN)
12

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

Fig. 7. Results of Study 4. (A) Source Memory differences significantly predicted recognition memory performances (r(143) = 0.60, ps < 0.001). (B) Exploratory
factor analysis results for Study 4. A darker green suggested a higher loading of the task on the latent factor. We observed that Flanker Square, Simon Square, Change
Localization and Filtering Change Localization loaded significantly onto Factor 1. Furthermore, Recognition and Source Memory significantly loaded onto Factor 2,
suggesting the existence of a long-term memory factor. (C) A sample Venn diagram on variance explained by attentional control, working memory and visual longterm memory. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

predict the magnitude of the attentional blink (Dale et al., 2013; Willems
& Martens, 2016). While Attentional Blink paradigms use similar rapid
stimulus presentation procedures to what we used in our RSVP recog­
nition task, they differ substantially in the working memory storage
demands they require. In Attentional blink tasks, subjects must selec­
tively consolidate and store just two predetermined targets from the
stream into working memory. By contrast, our RSVP recognition task
requires the consolidation and storage of ALL of the items in the stream.
It is plausible that when attempting to store just a few items from a rapid
stream (as in Attentional Blink tasks), individuals with high WMAC
ability have an advantage over those with low ability because the task
may rely heavily on successfully selecting just the targets for storage and
filtering out the remaining distractors: an ability that is well known to be
reduced in individuals with low working memory capacity (Adam et al.,
2015; Fukuda & Vogel, 2011; Vogel et al., 2005). By contrast, the RSVP
recognition task we used in Study 2 had no distractor filtering demands
during encoding because all items were to be remembered. Here, we
presume RSVP recognition performance does not correlate with working
memory ability because the heavy storage demands exceed even the
highest capacity individual’s ability to attend and store each item in the
rapid sequence into working memory.
Our findings suggest that the process of consolidating items into
working memory may play a key role in explaining the correlation be­
tween WMAC and long-term memory. This process is thought to reflect
the binding of item information to its spatial and temporal context
(Karlsen et al., 2010). Computational models have long proposed similar
binding mechanisms as a key component of working memory (Oberauer,
2019), plausibly binding an item to both the location and time it was
encountered (Thyer et al., 2022). Supporting this hypothesis, individual
differences in working memory, as typically measured using simulta­
neous change detection (i.e., entire set of to-be-remembered objects
presented together during encoding), are highly predictive of change
detection measured with sequential presentations (i.e., one item pre­
sented at a time, Zhao & Vogel, 2023). Therefore, visual array tasks, or
WMAC tasks in general, may engage the participants’ ability to bind
multiple items to different positions in displays with items presented
together in time, as well as the ability to temporally bind multiple items
to the same location when presented at different times within the
sequence. In our visuo-spatial source memory task, working memory
uniquely predicted spatial binding ability, which was not utilized in the
recognition memory task. Conversely, in the recognition memory task,
temporal binding appeared to play a more significant role in recognition
memory formation, given that a temporal structure is often present for
recognition memory even when order was is not being tested (Schwartz

et al., 2005). Supporting this hypothesis, we argue that the rapid stream
of images in Study 2 prevented the formation of sufficient temporal
binding in recognition memory. Consequently, working memory per­
formance no longer predicted recognition memory performance when
items were presented rapidly.
We consistently found that recognition memory and source memory
for real-world images remained correlated regardless of the presentation
rate and exposure duration of the images in all four of our Studies.
Moreover, the shared variance between source and recognition memory
remained significant even after attentional control abilities were
regressed out. Therefore, we believe that individual differences in visual
long-term memory form a construct that is somewhat correlated with,
yet distinct from, the known attentional control factor established in
previous research (Kane et al., 2004; Kane & Engle, 2002). Evidence
from Study 4 shows that both source memory and recognition memory
exhibit significantly positive loadings for the same underlying factor,
and that this factor is not the same as the attentional control factor from
the exploratory factor analysis. Therefore, our results suggest that there
is a generalized visual long-term memory factor, as suggested by a recent
theoretical review (Unsworth, 2019). Future studies on this long-term
memory factor are necessary to better explore the correlational and
mediational relationship between this factor and other established fac­
tors such as attentional control (Engle et al., 1999), fluid intelligence
(Unsworth et al., 2014), and false memory (Roediger, III & Mcdermott,
1995), to name a few.
The current study examined the relationships amongst performance
measures from several attention, working memory and visual long term
memory tasks. However, because there are other general ability mea­
sures such as fluid intelligence and processing speed that are known to
correlate with WMAC measures (Kail & Salthouse, 1994; Unsworth
et al., 2014), there are always lingering concerns that these untested
measures may be contributing to the correlational structure we are
observing between these constructs. For example, one possibility is that
long-term memory tasks require certain aspects of overall general ability
such as fluid intelligence (gF) instead of attention control per se. Pre­
vious research has suggested that measures of working memory capac­
ity, attentional control, and secondary memory all mediate the
relationship between working memory storage and gF (Unsworth et al.,
2014). Given the positive correlations among gF, WMAC, and long-term
memory, it remains unclear whether gF and WMAC explain distinct
variance in long-term memory. Likewise, declines in processing speed
have been shown to impact working memory declines associated with
aging (Salthouse, 1991, 1996, 2000). Thus, it is also plausible that the
common resources that we observed between visual long-term memory
13

Journal of Memory and Language 144 (2025) 104665

C. Zhao and E.K. Vogel

tasks and WMAC measures may be impacted by the individual’s pro­
cessing speed. That said, the results of Study 2 cast some doubt on
whether these alternative general ability constructs are sufficient to
explain our current findings. For example, our RSVP recognition study
was considerably more difficult than our slow recognition memory
procedure as evidenced by the large difference in average recognition
accuracy (i.e., 69 % vs 81 %), yet it is only the more challenging RSVP
recognition task that is not correlated with working memory capacity.
Individuals with high fluid intelligence are generally better at just about
all novel task environments (Kyllonen & Kell, 2017; Tschentscher et al.,
2017; Zook et al., 2004) and it’s not obvious why this general ability
wouldn’t have also given these individuals an advantage in the chal­
lenging RSVP recognition task. Relatedly, if processing speed differences
were what was producing the relationship between WMAC measures
and visual long-term memory one would expect that such a relationship
would continue (if not become stronger) when we increased the
encoding speed demands of the stimulus presentation in Study 2.
Instead, we found that this seemingly more processing speed-dependent
task condition no longer correlated with working memory. These ar­
guments notwithstanding, without measuring these other constructs
there will always be remaining uncertainty about the role of these
general factor constructs in the relationship between WMAC measures
and visual long-term memory. Future work should measure these con­
structs directly to better reveal the relationships between working
memory, attention control and visual long term memory. Furthermore,
our current study assesses recognition and source memory constructs
using single tasks for each, which may introduce task-specific variance
into our results. To achieve a more robust construct-level analysis that is
less susceptible to task-specific influences, future research should
incorporate multiple tasks representing both recognition and source
memory constructs.

Burgoyne, A. P., Tsukahara, J. S., Mashburn, C. A., Pak, R., & Engle, R. W. (2023). Nature
and measurement of attention control. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
2369–2402. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0001408
Craik, F. I., Govoni, R., Naveh-Benjamin, M., & Anderson, N. D. (1996). The effects of
divided attention on encoding and retrieval processes in human memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. General, 125(2), 159–180. https://doi.org/10.1037//00963445.125.2.159
Dale, G., Dux, P. E., & Arnell, K. M. (2013). Individual differences within and across
attentional blink tasks revisited. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 75, 456–467.
Draheim, C., Pak, R., Draheim, A. A., & Engle, R. W. (2022). The role of attention control
in complex real-world tasks. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 29(4), 1143–1197.
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-021-02052-2
Engle, R. W., Laughlin, J. E., Tuholski, S. W., & Conway, A. R. A. (1999). Working
memory, short-term memory, and general fluid intelligence: A latent-variable
approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 128(3), 309–331. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0096-3445.128.3.309
Fukuda, K., & Vogel, E. K. (2011). Individual differences in recovery time from
attentional capture. Psychological Science, 22(3), 361–368. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0956797611398493
Gold, J. J., Smith, C. N., Bayley, P. J., Shrager, Y., Brewer, J. B., Stark, C. E.,
Hopkins, R. O., & Squire, L. R. (2006). Item memory, source memory, and the medial
temporal lobe: Concordant findings from fMRI and memory-impaired patients.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(24), 9351–9356.
Guo, C., Duan, L., Li, W., & Paller, K. A. (2006). Distinguishing source memory and item
memory: Brain potentials at encoding and retrieval. Brain Research, 1118(1),
142–154.
Jolicøeur, P., & Dell’Acqua, R. (1998). The demonstration of short-term consolidation.
Cognitive Psychology, 36(2), 138–202.
Kail, R., & Salthouse, T. A. (1994). Processing speed as a mental capacity. Acta
Psychologica, 86(2–3), 199–225.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2002). The role of prefrontal cortex in working-memory
capacity, executive attention, and general fluid intelligence: An individualdifferences perspective. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9(4), 637–671. https://doi.
org/10.3758/BF03196323
Kane, M. J., Tuholski, S. W., Hambrick, D. Z., Wilhelm, O., Payne, T. W., & Engle, R. W.
(2004). The generality of working memory capacity: A latent-variable approach to
verbal and visuospatial memory span and reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 133(2), 189–217. https://doi.org/10.1037/00963445.133.2.189
Kanwisher, N. G., & Potter, M. C. (1990). Repetition blindness: Levels of processing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 16(1), 30–47.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.16.1.30
Karlsen, P. J., Allen, R. J., Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (2010). Binding across space
and time in visual working memory. Memory and Cognition, 38(3), 292–303. https://
doi.org/10.3758/MC.38.3.292
Kyllonen, P., & Kell, H. (2017). What is fluid intelligence? Can it be improved? Cognitive
Abilities and Educational Outcomes: A Festschrift in Honour of Jan-Eric Gustafsson,
15–37.
Luck, S. J., & Vogel, E. K. (1997). The capacity of visual working memory for features and
conjunctions. Nature, 390(6657), 279–284. https://doi.org/10.1038/36846
Martin, J. D., Tsukahara, J. S., Draheim, C., Shipstead, Z., Mashburn, C. A., Vogel, E. K.,
& Engle, R. W. (2021). The Visual Arrays Task: Visual Storage Capacity or Attention
Control? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 150(12), 2525–2551. https://
doi.org/10.1037/xge0001048
Meier, M. E., & Kane, M. J. (2017). Attentional control and working memory capacity.
The Wiley Handbook of Cognitive Control, 50–63.
Miller, A. L., Gross, M. P., & Unsworth, N. (2019). Individual differences in working
memory capacity and long-term memory: The influence of intensity of attention to
items at encoding as measured by pupil dilation. Journal of Memory and Language,
104(January 2018), 25–42. Doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2018.09.005.
Naveh-Benjamin, M., Guez, J., & Marom, M. (2003). The effects of divided attention at
encoding on item and associative memory. Memory & Cognition, 31, 1021–1035.
Oberauer, K. (2019). Working memory and attention–A conceptual analysis and review.
Journal of Cognition, 2(1).
Potter, M. C. (1975). Meaning in visual search. Science, 187(4180), 965–966.
Potter, M. C. (1976). Short-term conceptual memory for pictures. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 2(5), 509.
Robison, M. K., Miller, A. L., Wiemers, E. A., Ellis, D. M., Unsworth, N., Redick, T. S., &
Brewer, G. A. (2024). What makes working memory work? A multifaceted account of
the predictive power of working memory capacity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 153(9), 2193–2215. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0001629
Roediger, H. L., III, & Mcdermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false memories: Remembering
words not presented in lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21(4), 803–814.
Salthouse, T. A. (1991). Mediation of adult age differences in cognition by reductions in
working memory and speed of processing. Psychological Science, 2(3), 179–183.
Salthouse, T. A. (1996). The processing-speed theory of adult age differences in
cognition. Psychological Review, 103(3), 403–428. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033295X.103.3.403
Salthouse, T. A. (2000). Aging and measures of processing speed. Biological Psychology,
54(1–3), 35–54.
Schwartz, G., Howard, M. W., Jing, B., & Kahana, M. J. (2005). Shadows of the past:
Temporal retrieval effects in recognition memory. Psychological Science, 16(11),
898–904.
Shapiro, K. L., Raymond, J. E., & Arnell, K. M. (1997). The attentional blink. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 1(8), 291–296.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chong Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Visualization, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation,
Conceptualization. Edward K. Vogel: Writing – review & editing, Su­
pervision, Project administration, Investigation, Funding acquisition,
Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the funding from National Institute of Mental
Health (grant ROIMH087214); Office of Naval Research (grant N0001412-1-0972).
Data availability
The data, stimuli, and experimental codes will be posted at the Open
Science Framework (https://osf.io/vt8wu/). This study was not
preregistered.
